For those of you new to this Substack, go to paulpodolsky.com for my background and to see the books and podcasts Still Press produces. Also, Kevin Muir had me on the Market Huddle, the conversation is here.
Xi scares me. And I’m far from his grasp. I can’t imagine what it is like if you are close.
Under China’s Paramount Leader, the rare thing—start-ups that actually succeed—have been gutted, innocents arrested, Putin’s evisceration of Ukraine embraced and Covid policy has swung from locking people inside to letting them out with no coherent medical plan.
These decisions reflect a thinking pattern. Surging Covid deaths in the headlines are just the latest data point. Xi is either reckless or rigidly rooted in Soviet ideology or both. How can a person who assiduously climbed the Party’s slippery rungs and managed to change the constitution to allow him to serve for life be reckless? I don’t have a good answer except that the skills required to outwit rivals are sometimes negatively correlated to governing (think George W. Bush’s Iraq 2 invasion).
After Ukraine, it’s impossible to say with certainty Xi won’t invade Taiwan. The question for investors is if this risk is already, as they say, “priced in.” My answer is, “no.” The yield on the benchmark index of Chinese stocks today is 6%. The equivalent yield is 5% in the US. This means Chinese stocks are 20% cheaper than the US. To me, however, this pricing is way too low to justify biting. If Xi invades, the value of your assets may drop to zero, or close to it.
I suspect this is the reason Apple is relocating production facilities to Vietnam and Arizona. Imagine being inside the conversation between Tim Cook and Apple’s board. Fear contains dissent but it doesn’t attract capital.
China’s Context
For non-specialists, some China context is critical and I find missing in major news reports. A few key points.
China’s boom. For most of the 20th century, China was in chaos. Civil war. Famine. Bizarre psychological experiments. In the 1980s everything suddenly changed. One man, Deng, abandoned Mao’s policies. A slice of China, roughly the equivalent of Georgia to Alabama, sucked in labor from the interior and now assembles much of what the world consumes. Shenzhen and many other cities grew from the size of Burlington, VT to two New York cities in 30 years. Roughly 350 million people (more than the US population) ebbs and flows from factory to farm. While the boom brought both debt and environmental carnage it did lift millions and millions out of vicious poverty. Like the Soviet Union’s 1950 growth boom, however, this is unsustainable because you only need so many buildings and roads. China is at the “now what” stage.
China’s culture. As Gao Xiqing said on my podcast, China’s culture is ancient and evolves slowly. Gao is one of the most extraordinary people I have met and I encourage you to listen. About 100 years ago, China’s governance and family systems were more or less unchanged from 2,000 years earlier—emperors, gentry with concubines, peasants. Today, China’s culture is a quixotic mix of Confucian respect for authority, Sovietism, post-Cultural Revolution trauma, and income inequality. Judeo-Christian ethics are as distant to China as 道教 (Taoism) is to the West. About 5% of the country is college-educated and a tiny elite is incredibly erudite and worldly, some of them in positions of power. The ultra-modern is layered slapdash on the medieval. The photo below shows food rations by household. I took it in Western China.
China’s internal tension. Like most people, the Chinese value both wealth and tradition. This ancient conflict is particularly acute in China. Technology—railroads, electricity, combustion engines, computers—bring disruption and wealth. Culture creates order and stability. The more rigid the culture the more intense the tension.
Xi’s Fact Pattern
The above is the reality Xi faces. Difficult circumstances for any person. If China’s hardware is its culture, the software is Soviet and, within that context, the question is if you try to be more like Gorbachev and Deng or Stalin and Mao.
What’s clear in both Xi’s behavior and speeches is that he is a true Soviet believer. Like Putin, he believes Gorbachev was weak and misguided. Bill Bishop’s Sinocism does a good job of covering Xi.
“Our modern art and literature needs to take patriotism as its muse, guiding the people to establish and adhere to correct views of history, the nation, the country and culture,” Xi said.
You can draw a direct line between Xi’s words and Stalin. The core idea is you need to control thinking. That is the exact opposite of what is required to spur innovation. It’s also why, when put to a vote, like in Hong Kong or Ukraine, these systems are not popular.
Short People, Long Debt
The typical Chinese is about 1/7th as wealthy as the typical American. Spending equals income plus borrowing. Their future wealth depends on a) how productive they are b) how many of them there are and c) how much debt they can take on. China looks weak on all three fronts. While the Chinese work incredibly hard, the overall education level, as mentioned earlier is low. That means the absolute level of productivity is not high. And there are now less of these people, a legacy of the one-child policy. Terrible demographics make for weakening cash flow, a problem typically associated with a much wealthier country, like Japan.
A brain drain makes the demographics worse. China, like Russia, has trouble retaining its talent. Immigration is a significant tailwind to the US.
At some point, the post-boom debt needs to be repaid. Given that it is denominated in local currency, the Chinese can print and buy it—no acute debt crisis—though doing so puts downward pressure on the currency and upward pressure on inflation, neither of which is good for a foreign-investor.
Putin’s bet was that Russia could take Ukraine and force Europe to comply via energy dependence. Maybe Xi is thinking that the world can’t do without China’s production. But that’s wrong. Xi doesn’t only scare me, which is why the Apples are quietly moving production out and why I think thoughtful investors will stay away. This leaves the enormous potential productivity of the Chinese untapped. A tragedy, given how many good, well-intentioned, hard-working people there are there.
Investment Implications
I ran a little long this post, so I will keep the investment implications a bit shorter. A few things worth pointing out. As always, this is not investment advice. You get to see what I am doing, to take or leave. Investing involves risk and you can and will lose money.
Given the above, I have no exposure to China. I once owned both Chinese stocks and bonds. When Putin invaded Ukraine, I sold every Chinese investment I had. Chinese stocks (the white line) have gone sideways since the 2006 bubble. The S&P 500 is in red. It’s worth recalling that this can happen to any stock market, but China’s is largely a function of a shareholder-unfriendly culture.
Regarding my portfolio, I think more and more evidence is tilting toward inflation coming down. I’ve run a variety of different calculations and come at inflation being around 2% or 3% a year from now. That means the Federal Reserve could stop cutting now and just wait. That doesn’t mean they cut rates however, which is what’s priced it.
Last week, I reduced the size of my hedges more following what I took to be a good CPI report and increased the size of my “risk-on” risk by buying a government-insured municipal bond and adding some exposure to metal producers. As the inflation scare ends, we will be left with a push into alternative vehicles that is wildly metals intensive. In general, I reduced my hedges by about 3% and increased my risk-seeking portfolio by about the same. I probably need to add some more equity risk. Below is my current portfolio.
