Most of the week I was in San Francisco and today want to share a framework for tech that I think you will find helpful. Before doing so, I will briefly touch on what is going on in the world because things are moving so fast. Whether via work, savings or relationships, we are flying through an economic/geopolitical typhoon.
Here is the summary:
Outlook
In response to high inflation, we are in the midst of a rapid reduction in the amount of money being printed. Mechanically, this will drive unemployment up, wages and stock prices down. But the impact is disproportionate so far. Tech stocks are down 30%, unemployment has not risen much. Unemployment needs to rise for inflation to fall, meaning the central bank needs to be restrictive, which is terrible for stock prices.
Russia is in a dangerous, self-reinforcing deterioration. In response to mobilization, educated Russians are fleeing and others forcibly enlisted, which will lead to a dire shortage of capable people running the country’s institutions. The political convulsions to come may be along the lines that occurred in 1991 (collapse of Soviet Union) or 1917 (collapse of Czar), but at a time when the world is far more globally integrated. The world is (was) dependent on Russian energy and minerals, Russia is dependent on Western technology and medicine.
The combination of the above is forcing Europeans to accept lower living standards. This is in the form of more of their money going towards paying for energy and perhaps rationing of energy this winter and less consumption on everything else. The risk is a fracturing of political consensus around the opposition to Russia. China is also in a self-reinforcing weakening caused by a combination of zero Covid policy, ideological rigidity and the popping of a massive, slow moving real estate bubble.
That is a lot to digest! If you feel jittery looking at your savings or the stock price of the company you work at or your nation’s borders, you are correctly perceiving an environment of heightened risk. All the above is happening against the backdrop of a tech revolution.
Tech Frankenstein
To deeply understand the above, you have to understand what is going on with technology. I’ll explain the Frankenstein reference a bit later. This week, biking past the downtown San Francisco offices of companies that have changed our day-to-day— Slack, Uber, Google—and, a bit down the road, addicts injecting themselves in the open, I searched for a framework to make sense of what I saw.As I’ve noted before, we have been going through waves of innovation over the past 200 years, including canals, railroads, combustion engines, electricity and antibiotics. All were disruptive but they disrupted in different ways. What is specific to this wave?
Four attributes stand out: scale, wealth, specialization and ethical blinders.
Scale—America is regional economies, film in LA, finance in New York. In Silicon Valley it’s possible to go from idea, to program to concept to a few billion users. A lot of people are touched by the railroad, but not a few billion people at once. That’s why they call tech “viral.”
Human beings don’t grasp scale. As one person said to me, “the reason why a Google engineer can obsess over the difference in a shade of color on a banner is because if the click through rate goes to 0.3 from 0.2 that can translate into hundreds of millions of dollars.”
Most tech start-ups fail and don’t reach this scale. But those that do win big. Everyone in tech-land is looking for the next profit hockey stick (i.e. exponential wealth) based on unprecedented scale.
Wealth—Scale creates wildly disparate wealth. The talk of the town was the recent acquisition of Brown University dropout Dylan Field’s Figma for a cool $20 billion. The founder has a roughly 20% stake I’m told, meaning his take is $4 billion.
Too little money is terrible and confining, but too much money does strange things to you, which is why every major religious text I am aware of describes wealth as a barrier to spiritual fulfillment. Being around extreme wealth can make you a bit crazy, too. This craziness is part of our current tech wave.
Most tech workers are worker bees. They write the software, manage the projects, analyze the data and provide legal advice. But a small number of them hit the lottery. The companies often motivate by claiming altruistic goals. And maybe some of that happens. But everyone is wondering, quietly, if they might be the one to get rich.
Specialization—Tech requires specialists, like the person who is an expert on the rate at which a certain computer language can extract information from a certain data base. A classic on-ramp into Silicon Valley is a computer science major from an elite university. A penchant for details is table stakes.
What these people are NOT is someone who steps back and asks how the whole system works, or what are its downstream consequences.  Moreover, trying to figure out how exactly the algorithms at Facebook determine your news feed is not something any one person understands. It is the net result of hundreds if not thousands of specialists working over many years.  
These companies change how we do things, not what we do. Before this tech revolution, we corresponded, read the news, took taxis and booked hotels. Now we just do it differently (Twitter vs New York Times) and that shift, given the scale, has upended basic structures around truth, income and social stability.
Blinders—Creating programs that influence the lives of billions of people at once carries responsibility. But I doubt the people who create these programs are the people to shoulder that responsibility both due to their motivations (the cash geyser) and their wiring (specialists). Yet, I suspect for regulators it is hard to know what to do because they lack the specialist’s understanding.
So we are stuck. We have technology that has enormous power, and can be cool, but the mix of good and evil in our society has not shifted in any substantial way and the tech mimics that. Tech allows us to connect with long lost friends and allows surveillance states to tighten their grip.
In that sense, Frankenstein is a good metaphor. The term’s roots are Mary Shelley’s 1818 novel of the same name about a scientist’s experiment to create life into something that isn’t alive. Great artists, through some mysterious process, have an odd futuristic antennae that picks up what is coming. Tech has given a mind to AI driven algos to help us date, drive, discuss, etc. but if we are to assert an ethical overlay on this, it won’t come from SFO.
Investment Implications
NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE.
My views continue to evolve as I get further evidence of where we are. To step back. When I started this Substack, I shared with readers that stocks were moving higher because real yields were depressed. In July of 2021, I wrote:
“Many (but not all) measures of US stock prices (none of them precise) suggest the US stock market is very expensive relative to average. The very success of past money printing has increased household sensitivity to the stock market going forward…I also recognize even a modest money printing reduction could have an outsize effect, driving stocks sharply lower.”
This March, I reduced my equities to 10% long and moved my bonds to 110% short, as I noted in this post. Yields have since climbed from below 2% to 3.7%.
Now I think we are at a spot where bond yields are more attractive than they have been in years and I think stock prices will a) in aggregate fall but b) a sliver of companies will continue to make good money in a recession and will gradually separate from the pack when earnings are proven to be resilient. I particularly like inflation linked bonds because the real yield has climbed to close to 1.6%. I almost never move my portfolio around this much but, as I said at the top, we are in a typhoon. I have increased my stock short and started to add inflation linked bonds in the US and Australia.
My results are mediocre in absolute space, 1%, but great compared to the 24% loss in the S&P 500. This Sunday from 3 pm I will open a Zoom link where you can ask me anything. If you are busy, carry on. If it’s helpful, I’m available. I value you as subscribers and want to be helpful. The zoom meeting # is: 741-216-7007.
