When I say “it”, I mean both modernity and post-truth, post-Cold War conflict. Sarajevo, where I spent a few days this week, is both where the triggering event of WW1 transpired and a key theater in the 1992-1995 Bosnian War. The fear in Sarajevo now is that if Putin begins to win in Ukraine, China will swiftly move on Taiwan and Serbia will attack Bosnia. Recent clashes between Serbs and Kosovaars amplified those fears.
Just as Covid brings the 1918 pandemic to life, Ukraine brings past conflicts to life. WW1 consumed about 40 million lives, 2% of the global population. The Bosnian War consumed about 100k lives, but came to a sudden end when NATO bombed Serb positions around Sarajevo. Given that Serbia is roughly the population of Massachusetts, NATO enjoyed overwhelming force. Looking at the pieces on the global chessboard today, the risks seem closer to WW1 while the post-truth narrative parallels the Bosnian War. Said another way, the stakes in Ukraine are much, much higher than just Ukraine.
The Birth of Modernity
The spot where Archduke Ferdinand was assassinated is now a shabby, easily overlooked corner in downtown Sarajevo marked by the plaque below.
This is looking into downtown, the plaque is on the right.
Turning 180 degrees, I stared up at the verdant hills where the 1984 Winter Olympics were held and, in 1992, Serbian tanks encircled this city and pounded civilians with artillery and sniper fire. A section of downtown Sarajevo was re-named Sniper’s Alley.
The first I heard of Sarajevo was in a high school history course on the origins of German fascism. The story began with WW1, German hyper-inflation and aggrieved nationalism. With time, I came to see that one had to look even further back. In the 19th century, waves of technological change—canals, railroads, electricity—up-ended agriculturally-based social and economic rhythms, straining systems of government to adapt.
Social disruption goes hand-in-hand with improving living standards. The first railroad was built in Bosnia in 1872 and, like railroads everywhere, was a corridor of modernity. This week, asked about his thoughts on Uber, one interlocutor in Sarajevo told me, “oh, the taxi drivers here would beat the crap out of an Uber driver.” Economic shifts disrupt entrenched interests.
Via the Renaissance, Enlightenment and American and French Revolutions, Western political systems grudgingly evolved alongside disruptive technology. Not so much in what was known in my childhood as Yugoslavia.
On the day a Serb nationalist shot the Archduke, Bosnia was more or less lodged in a Middle Ages-era governing structure—a King ruled subjects. The Archduke, heir to the Astro-Hungarian throne and in formal military attire, was in Sarajevo to review the troops. Today, the Serb assassin is honored with a downtown Belgrade street in his name and Bosnia is still ruled by a potentate, this one appointed by the UN, whose power supersedes locally elected officials.
Countries, like people, fracture on fault lines. With better technology the fractures are more lethal—machine guns replace clubs, nukes replace machine guns. After WW1, Bosnia was absorbed into the newly created Kingdom of Yugoslavia, another feudal governing structure, even as West pushed for the creation of a supra-national governing authority, the League of Nations, a failed attempt to avert another world war.
The 1992-1995 War as Template
After WW2, Yugoslavia’s partisan hero Tito gradually seized control of an area that has since broken into seven different countries. Tito put a firm lid on internecine hatred, pushing it underground with Soviet ideology. Tito was more practical than ideological, however, adopting Soviet tactics where they served him well but shifting where they didn’t, like in economic policy. Soviet citizens regarded a trip to Yugoslavia as almost like going to Paris. The scope of Tito’s accomplishment was hard to understand until the war broke out in 1992.
Tito died in 1980, just nine years before the Berlin Wall fell. Two years later, 1991, the most wealthy, Western parts of Yugoslavia bailed on the Yugoslavia project. Slovenia (Melania Trump’s hometown) is nestled next to Italy and taking orders from backwards Belgrade seemed absurd. Croatia owns the prime real estate along the Adriatic and correctly saw that on their own they could become a tourist Mecca, the Amalfi Coast at a fraction the price.
Bosnia is roughly 50% muslim, 50% Christian, split between Orthodox (Serb) and Catholic (Croat). When the 99% of those Bosnians who voted (the Serbs boycotted), to become independent of Serbia, the Serbian penalty administered, as in efforts to scale the Berlin Wall, was death.
When the Bosnian war kicked into its most lethal phase, I read the news in a graduate school library and had trouble making sense of what was going on. Driving to Sarajevo up a windy road dotted with newly built (Saudi and Malaysia funding) mosques helped put things into perspective. The Serbs are a Russian client-state united by a history in authoritarian governing structures, similar language and religion and an ancient suspicion of Muslim populations.
To be sure, there are pro-Western liberals in both Serbia and Russia, though they are in the minority. In my many trips to Russia and this recent trip to Serbia, I was frequently greeted with kindness. Yet the facts of the Bosnian War are terrifying and indisputable.
What was correctly judged as coercion and genocide in the West seemingly perhaps, though some weird nationalist filter, looked like stability and order to Serb leaders. The alignment of aggrieved anger (Serbs) at territorial succession (Bosnia, Croatia, Slovenia, etc) versus Western outrage at civilian atrocities is a template for Ukraine which, like Bosnia, is also a split society with obvious fault lines. About 70% of the population speaks Ukrainian and looks West, which the Kremlin finds intolerable. Putin has determined the punishment for leaving Russia’s influence, as in Bosnia, is death.
Post-truth Versus Truth
In 1995, NATO, acting under a UN-mandate, put a halt to Serbia’s aggression just as the genocide against Muslims was accelerating. Srebrenica, a town a few hours to the east of Sarajevo, is perhaps the most notorious atrocity. Eight thousand three hundred Bosnian Muslims were murdered on the orders of Serb Ratko Mladic. Four years later, as Serbs moved against another former Yugoslavian muslim enclave, Kosovo, NATO bombed Belgrade in an effort to get them to stop. Bombs fell near the hotel we stayed in.
NATO’s Belgrade bombing is a touchstone of Putin’s post-truth propaganda. His argument is that NATO didn’t have UN authorization to bomb Belgrade, thus international law is a farce. If Putin wants to protect Russians in Ukraine, Putin argues, he has a precedent. Yet, staring at the photographs in the Sarajevo Genocide Museum of a Bosnian boy killed by Serb snipers, I can’t get my mind around any other narrative than that NATO and the US military did exactly the right thing.
A key technique used by post-truth dictators like Putin, both actual and aspirational, is “whataboutism.” As opposed to thinking about how things should work, facts and evidence, whataboutism twists the truth to fit a ready-made agenda. “Yes, we may be violating Ukraine’s borders but what about…," and Putin comes back to Belgrade again and again. The correct question is is violating Ukraine’s border lawful or not.
Russian TV piped into my Belgrade hotel room was laced with preposterous claims about neo-Nazis running amuck in Ukraine, “whataboout…”. The Russian news also attacks the characteristics of individual policy makers—like Biden and Pelosi’s age—rather than the policy they articulate. This filters down to regular folk. Serbia is dotted with graffiti in praise of Mladic, now a convicted war criminal. I don’t speak Serbian but it is close enough to Russian to decipher the below: “Ratko Mladic is a hero!”
This manipulation is perhaps easier to achieve given the current wave to technological change is in information rather than railroads. Everywhere I go, people—rich, poor, east, west—are glued to their phones, imbibing little tidbits of information often I suspect with poor context. It takes work to parse propaganda. One Belgrade waiter loudly declared to a German neighbor of mine, referring to Kosovo, “it’s like Bavaria succeeding from Germany, that wouldn't be Germany anymore now would it?”
Perhaps Putin will end up like Serbia’s Milosevic, a global pariah, detained and neutralized. But that outcome was a function, as noted above, of Serbia’s relative isolation. Russia, supported by China, is a much different matter. I hadn’t realized how high the stakes in Ukraine were and how precarious the current balance of power until I came here. The pain, particularly in Europe, of opposing Putin will become more higher as winter approaches, temperatures cool and demand for natural gas rises.
Case Study: Lithium
A combo of global warming and dependence on fossil fuels from unsavory actors like Russia is leading to a push for electric vehicles, which in turn creates a dependence on electric batteries and one of their key components, lithium. Lithium is rare and one of the meaningful deposits recently discovered was near where I am writing this in Serbia.
The mine attracted a $2.4 billion investment from Anglo-Australian miner Rio-Tinto. and was seen by the Belgrade leadership here as a way to help vault Serbia into a higher income bracket. The mine, however, was also in the middle of Serbia’s agricultural heartland and farmers and others mounted a protest that, so far, has succeeded in blocking it. Rio’s licenses have been revoked.
There are many elements to this story but for the sake of space I’ll skip details. Suffice to say, there is deep irony in the tweet by tennis champ Djokovic in support of the protestors to prioritize “clean air.” This is the trick with the envisaged shift in consumption required to deal with global warming. To create “clean air” requires us to, at the same time, make dirty water from lithium mining. This is why the transition away from fossil fuels is likely to be very slow.
Change, like I said earlier, is disruptive. As I drove through the lush fields around the proposed mine I understood why the farmers were so upset. While I think electric cars are cool, I would not want a lithium mine abutting my property either.
Beyond trying to make sense of all this, I’ve been trying to protect myself by building a portfolio that can survive a broader global conflict. I need to do more homework before I share anything. As I noted in my last post, I’ve taken off my equity hedge and am now up about 2% on the year.
Thank you all for your support and enjoy your August! As always, send me questions and comments. I read and respond to all of them.
