Monday was warm and sunny in Belzoni, Mississippi. As I turned a corner in a downtown pocked with empty buildings, I was greeted with a genial “good morning” by a man with a holstered weapon on his hip, legal in an open-carry state. The post-Civil Rights Delta is a juxtaposition of amiable people, violence, progress and dysfunction.
I traveled to Mississippi, the subject of today’s essay, for the same reason I spent time in Russia, China and other places foreign to me—the unfamiliar is the fastest route to broadening perspective about what is true. Every society has their sins and fragilities. America’s include slavery, Civil War, Civil Rights, economic disruption and Trumpism and they all run through Mississippi. The region is also home to America’s distinct artistic voice, including the blues and Faulkner.
Violence and Rankings
“It’s like the wild west up there,” said another Belzoni man, this one missing teeth and nodding in the direction of Greenwood. I was debating between driving east toward Greenwood, population 15,000, or west toward Indianola, birthplace of BB King and was asking for some guidance. “They got bodies lying around, I don’t know 20 or 30 this year alone,” he said.
“Why do they shoot people?” I asked.
“They’ll shoot ya just because ya look hard,” he said.
I crossed Greenwood off the itinerary and later Googled the numbers. He was right. Greenwood, one of many Mississippi towns key to the Civil Rights movement, today is more dangerous than 96% of US towns. Below is Belzoni’s now vacant Turner’s Drug Store where Sonny Boy Williamson recorded in 1947.
“It seems like we’ve determined to be at the bottom of every list, or the top of every list that you want to be the bottom of,” said Mississippi resident and actor Morgan Freeman, as quoted by Richard Grant in Dispatches from Pluto. “Teenage pregnancy, education, poverty, you name it.”
The Essential Unfamiliar
I grew up in Washington, D.C. in the 1970s and 80s and the unfamiliar was all around, if you looked for it. There were embassies of foreign countries I vowed to one day visit. There was also D.C. itself, which was not legally segregated but blacks and whites often worshipped at different churches, listened to different music and lived in different neighborhoods.
As a teenager, I played for two summers in a jazz band sponsored by Mayor Marion Barry. I was the only white guy in a roughly 15 person group. It was clear that while much was similar between my bandmates and me, there were also significant differences.
Beyond the color of our skin, we dressed differently, had different speech patterns (I was slower on any rejoinder) and approached the work differently. For some of my bandmates, playing music wasn’t an “extra curricular,” it was a way out via recruitment to one of the elite college marching bands. I didn’t know any students at my mostly white high school who engaged with music with that degree of necessity and intensity. Clearly, the weight of a very different history and momentum was at play but, at the time, I didn’t have the words to put a name on it.
Later, working as a foreign correspondent in Moscow, I married local. Through my wife Marina I began to see how fundamentally unfamiliar another person’s upbringing can be. Marina was born in a log cabin without running water. Her father was a violent alcoholic. The KGB threatened her and she viewed the government or joining any mass movement that had a whiff of Soviet to it with deep skepticism. With time, I began to see my own circumstances and perspectives were just one of many, each “normal” to the person who experienced them.
Money Flows
Fast forward to today. The US has had Obama, then Trump, political whiplash. New England, where I live, was largely terrified of Trumpism and many viewed Obama as an unambiguous sign of progress. In Mississipi, in 2020, 57% voted for Trump, with the Delta, where Belzoni is located, solidly Biden.
Why did Trumpism resonate in Mississippi? I arrived via Alabama and my initial impression was not so much a history of racism, though that was soon evident and clearly played a role in the rise of Trump. Instead, my initial impression was economic decline. Montgomery, Selma, Leland and Greenville looked just as beat up as Belzoni.
Money is unstable and grows or shrinks in a self-reinforcing way. Income leads to borrowing leads to growth in capital. Shrinking population, productivity and competitiveness leads to shrinking income and sends the cycle into a painful reverse. Typically, there is a shock, a key slice of society leaves, often the elite, which reduces the tax base, lowers productivity and public services and weakens the social fabric, which then leads to more people outflows.
In Russia, for instance, that shock was the 1917 Revolution, then Stalinism, now the war in Ukraine. Each time, talent flees and the political culture becomes nastier. Mississippi has had repeated economic shocks including the Civil War, the Great Migration (1910-1970) and China’s 1982 opening, which eviscerated manufacturing jobs turning its cotton into clothes. In these periods, Mississippi experienced net population outflows, particularly of more educated people.1
The Great Stain
If the economics felt like Russia or Yugolsavia’s decline, the memorials were along the lines of what I’ve seen in Berlin, Oscwiecim (Auschwitz), Sarajevo and Nanjing. Human beings have a terrifying capacity for violence and even sadistic cruelty. In Montgomery, Alabama signs identify the location of the main slave market and a memorial to lynching victims. Metal boxes, below, show names, dates and places and hang, hauntingly, above you.
Slavery and Jim Crow unfolded not in a spasm of violence but over hundreds of years. In that sense, the legacy is more like the long crushing weight of the Russian state on serfs and then Soviet citizens and less like a bloody but discrete war.
“This was still going on in the 1970s,” said a restaurant owner I spoke with in Leland, referring to segregated swimming pools.
“I thought the laws changed in the 1960s,” I said.
“Laws? Well, they outlawed slavery in 1865, but look what happened.”
Point taken. Integration is one generation old. Now in the Delta much of the political leadership is Black but the wealth is still largely white, as Grant’s excellent book noted. It is now up to these leaders to reverse the decline, a tall order. xxx
Wealth Culture
Listening to a thoughtful preacher Sunday morning easily juggling references to the Bible, MC Hammer (“too legit to quit”) and personal history, was a reminder Christianity provided African Americans with an ideological template for opposing slavery and Jim Crow. The Old Testament’s foundation myth is escaping Egyptian slavery.
But creating wealth requires different habits than enduring cruelty. Key is education, trust, innovation and rule of law. Many Delta schools rank an “F.” The economy is dependent on cotton, catfish and prisons. Lost trust is incredibly difficult to restore, evident in the capital Jackson’s water crisis. (This was the key theme in my podcast with Russian doctor Alexander Vanuykov).
“They say it’s OK to drink, but me, personally, I don’t drink it,” said the clerk at my Jackson hotel. While the EPA now asserts the water was safe, few seemed to believe them. Jackson’s Democratic mayor is Chokwe Antar Lumumba. Congressional representation is Republican as is the Governor, Tate Reves. The mayor blames the water crisis on lack of state funds,, the Governor asserts poor management. 
I drove the half dozen blocks to get dinner in Jackson. It felt too dangerous to walk and the statistics show a surge in murders, mostly blacks killing blacks.2 “If visiting Jackson, avoid going out at night at all costs…gun violence is rampant, warned the website Housegrail.com.
Odds of Success
Taking the broad view, I’m optimistic. Mississippi has come a long, long way from where it was. The US nearly collapsed, twice, dragging Mississippi into modernity but both the nation and the state survived. The big disruptive idea was equality. In the end, truth and logic won out.
Missing in any of the articles and books I read to understand the Delta was a core framework, attachment, I explored in my first book, Raising a Thief. Childhood disruption causes lasting, massive impacts on future productivity. My wife and I spent enormous energy trying to rectify our daughter’s mistreatment before we adopted her. Yet, even with those efforts, she went on to commit a felony as an adult.Given the Delta’s history, the thing that would make a big difference is doing what Geoffrey Canada is doing in Harlem, which is aggressive early childhood intervention, starting prenatal, to improve educational outcomes later on. Better education would equal a more productive workforce and investment inflows. Labor and land is a fraction the cost it is elsewhere. But as we experienced in our own family, easier said than done.
Investment Outlook
Looking back, it is always so obvious. This year, stocks fell until around June and bonds fell until October. If you held cash you did relatively OK. If you shorted stocks and then held cash, you did great. Two decisions. Every year, in retrospect, is like that, simple.
The only thing that matter is the going forward. Good money management fascinates some and bores others, but it is the key fact that gives you independence from the forces in life that constrain you. Remember, money is unstable and can evaporate. If your money was in Russia this year, or the US in 1929 or in a conventional portfolio (60% stocks, 40% bonds) in the 1970s, you lost a lot of dough.
So here is what I think is clear or more or less clear.
Cash rates have risen a lot and are now, for the first time in a long, long time attractive. You can earn 4% for taking no risk.
Inflation is still high. It’s running at about 5%! That’s high. Inflation is high because spending is strong and spending is strong because the tightening has yet to hit most sectors of the economy, tech and housing are the exception.
The market is discounting pretty strong growth and low inflation.
My expectation now is that the Fed keeps rates high and growth and inflation gradually grind lower. But it will take a while. This means.
Cash is attractive.
Bond and bond-like assets offer attractive yield including: inflation linked bonds, bank preferred stocks, Federally insured municipal bonds.
Equities with very low PEs and attractive yield are probably OK, but contain more risk.
Relative to my asset allocation, I am underweight stocks, overweight bonds and at neutral rate infrastructure stocks. I think it’s possible to earn a 6% or so return with relatively low risk over the next few quarters and that is what I am aiming to do.
