Hi there! To my many unpaid subscribers, today I’m jumping directly to the paywall and skipping free content. If you are after free content, I get it and am delighted you have signed up. However, I need to balance your desire for free stuff with my desire to build a business! If you are a student, give me a shout. I may make adjustments. Separately, next week I head to Chile to better understand copper, lithium, and politics. If there are Subscribers down there or if you know someone good to talk to, please let me know. Today subscribers receive my outlook, investment results, asset allocation, and the details of a Subscriber-only call later this week.
Compasses are magical until they encounter janky force fields and stop giving accurate readings. A strong magnetic pulse, like at the North Pole, can do it. We are in the financial equivalent of a magnetic pulse now.
The question is how to proceed given that the answers to the questions a reasonable investor currently has are not knowable. That’s what I discuss in today’s post. (Note at the very end are the details for a Subscriber-only zoom call this Thursday at 2 pm Eastern time. The topic is asset allocation but ask me anything).
Here is what’s odd. Inflation is falling and the labor market is tightening. It’s not supposed to work that way. The economy is holding up even though the central bank has jacked up rates. That’s also not supposed to happen.
My hunch is we are still in the midst of pandemic distortions. It has taken three years to move from lockdowns to normalization. Given that the inflation spike began in March of 2021 (shown below), perhaps it takes until 2024 for things to even out. If inflation does continue falling, interest rates will too and as they do PEs on stocks will rise and margins at companies may improve as labor costs fall.
But what if all that doesn't happen? After all, unemployment is at record lows, garbage stocks are rallying and commodities are no longer falling. Maybe interest rates may need to go even higher. Or maybe the Fed tightening has yet to hit the economy.
Markets are never clear, it’s just that they are unusually unclear right now. NOTHING I say here is investment advice. You get to see what I am doing while I do it, for you to take or leave. Bottom line: I am longer risky assets (stocks, bonds, credit) than I have been in a while and I have hedges on against the risk that I am wrong. These hedges are not for the faint of heart. To repeat, I am not recommending you do anything. My hedges = 100% of my capital meaning that my total exposure in the markets today is greater than the actual money I possess.
This raises the question of whether leverage (owning more exposure than your net worth) is good or bad. In general, leverage is terrible. In my case, I wouldn’t be employing it if I didn’t think it was risk-reducing, which is counterintuitive.
Where We Have Been
For those readers who have been with me since the beginning (thank you!), my views have evolved. I’m summarizing this here so newer readers know the history. I started keeping track of my investment results in 2007 and started writing these posts in 2021.
In 2021, I thought rates were too low, thereby juicing the stock market and setting us up for problems. Assets compete. If the return on bonds is terrible money floods the stock market, boosting prices to unsustainable levels. In July 2021, I wrote Our Stock Market Addiction and included the below chart, which shows the collapse in long-term interest rates and the spike up in the stock market. At that point, I was modestly long stocks (10%) and short bonds. I said if interest rates started to rise, the stock market rally would end…fast. It did.
2. In 2022, rates started climbing and stocks started falling. I was significantly short bonds but slow to get out of my long equity position. Some of the individual stocks I owned fell more than the overall market. Ouch. I wrote about this in March 2022 in Policy Error Vortex. This is a good example about how hard it is to implement precisely. I shared the asset allocation I had at the time, 115% short bonds and 10% long stocks. (A number greater than 100% means I am using leverage).
Late in 2022, as real rates rose from 1% negative to 1% positive, I began to get long bonds believing the central banks had done enough to slow the economy. I wrote about this in The Storm Ebbs in November of 2022 and showed my short bonds had flipped to long bonds and long stocks.
I made many mistakes along the way. My unaudited results are below, both by year and cumulative if I had invested $1 on day 1.
My goal is to make a steady return but not blow up. Of course, if I could earn more money, I’d be happier. If I don’t use it, I’ll give it away. The above return matches the S&P 500 with less risk, about half, and is significantly above the return of foreign stock markets, like the German DAX.
…Where (I think) We Are Now
There are two competing scenarios.
Scenario #1, an upcoming, imminent bust. Former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers warned Friday the US economy might face a “Wiley coyote moment” when firms realize they have too much inventory, including people, and slam on the brakes, a lagged impact of Fed’s hikes. If this happens, the stock market will fall. We could re-test or go through the summer lows of around 3500 shown below.
Michael Burry, the legendary guy portrayed in The Big Short, my former boss Ray Dalio, Elliot Management’s founder Paul Singer are all publicly saying versions of this. They are all smart. One linkage embedded within this view is the typical lead-lag relationship between a rapid tightening and a slowing economy. They believe the pain is yet to come.
One market measure of this “tightness” is the difference in yield in 2-year to 10-year government bonds. Typically, the 10-year yields more than the 2-year because you are lending money to the government for longer. Today, two-year yields are close to 4.5% and ten-year yields are around 3.7%. The market is saying that monetary policy is so tight that future growth and inflation will collapse, thus the lower yield.
One way to then “hedge” the possible collapse in growth or that the Fed needs to tighten more is to bet that this curve (shown below) goes back to normal. Growth might collapse and two-year rates fall. Or inflation is out of control and the Fed can not cut rates and ten-year rates are dragged higher. Both scenarios will tend to hurt the stock market. The average curve is 88 basis points positive and is now negative 80 basis points.
Scenario #2, soft landing, inflation is indeed falling back to normal, the labor market will gradually loosen, the Fed has won the battle on inflation. This scenario is more favored by New York Times columnist and Nobel Prize winner Paul Krugman, most household investors, and the average bond market investor, who has priced in interest rate cuts of about 50 bps in the second half of this year. Inflation is indeed falling, as the table below shows.
If inflation continues to fall at the rate it has been, it will be back to normal in one year.
The Riddle
The riddle in scenario #2 is why inflation is falling even as the labor market is tight. I think three things are going on—creative destruction, immigrants, and robots.
Creative Destruction
While the pandemic is what grabs our attention, the background is tech bros trying to figure out how to disrupt existing businesses. This is still going on and is deflationary. I tweeted the below Friday. The disruption in drug prices is just the latest twist in a long deflationary, tech transformation story that began with books (Amazon) and has hit most sectors. More is coming.
This is a big deal. Over the medium-term, the big inflationary forces in the US economy are health care and education, two ossified areas that have resisted tech innovation. (1/3)
Almost 20% of the US labor force is foreign-born. There was a big dip during the pandemic. How many of these people waited out the storm at home, where the cost of living is cheaper? I don’t know. Are they now re-integrating into the US?1 It seems so. This supply will drive down wages and is still catching up.
Robots
Finally, to the degree labor markets remain tight, it’s possible business owners accelerate technological, labor-minimizing practices, like iPads in restaurants or robots in Amazon warehouses and other labor-saving techniques.
The reason why scenario #1 people could be wrong is that they misjudge the lead-lag relationship in this cycle. The typical boom is financed by credit. This one wasn’t. The government gave lower-income household checks and they spent them. Now that stimulus money is out of the system the ability to negotiate labor deals is worse (people have less to fall back on) so wage inflation will ebb as the deflationary forces I describe above continue to work.
How Am I Investing?
I am longer risk assets than I have been but with hedges. Hedges = short stocks, short German bonds, short US ten-year bonds, short longer-dated Fed Funds contract. If I were the Fed staring at the above circumstances, I would not cut, which is what they are priced to do by Q4. They don’t know the answer to these questions any better than we do.
If the economy tanks (hard to imagine with unemployment so low) then I will lose money on my stocks but the long bonds and hedges will help protect me. It’s a matter of degree. A 20% long position in the stocks means if the stock market falls 10% my portfolio loses 2%. If I can see more evidence inflation is slowing, I will significantly boost my equity exposure. If inflation truly is “sticky” I will lose money, but the hedges will help soften that a bit and as evidence mounts, I’ll shift my bets.
I am hosting a zoom call Thursday at 2 pm to talk more about how I approach asset allocation in general and any other questions you have. DIAL 714-216-7007 and you will find my smiling face.
