Most of you receive the free version of these essays. There is much more available for paid subscribers, including actionable insights into investments, interview transcripts and a direct line into my inbox. It costs more than a newspaper and less than competitors. If you are saving even modest amounts of money, the likelihood of learning something that allows for this publication to pay for itself is high. (I do not provide, however, investment advice; you get to see what I do as I do it, for you to take or leave). Separately, Still Press Producer Dave is hard at work editing our Season #5 podcasts, which I think you will enjoy. If you were traveling and missed the Yugoslavia posts, they are here and here.
“For most of its inhabitants, the modern world is full of black boxes, devices whose internal workings remain—to different degrees—a mystery to their users.”—Vaclav Smil.
Today, I want to talk about three inter-related black boxes—energy, Russia and the stock market. All three are key components of the modern world, abstract and easier to understand when they don’t work smoothly. It’s a bit like the wind. You can see the impact, not the thing itself, particularly in a storm. European natural gas prices have risen 26 fold, retreating Russian soldiers left a patchwork of freshly dug mass graves in Ukraine and stock markets have lost between 10% and 20%. 
Some readers find these events so distressing they prefer to look away. I recommend against that. Now is the time to see how the black boxes actually work. For instance, even as stock prices on average sink, there will be a scramble to buy companies that can reliably provide energy. There has to be. That’s why Warren Buffet asked permission to buy half of a company called Occidental Petroleum. To understand why, you need to pry open the boxes. 
The Energy Black Box
We can’t define what exactly energy is, as Smil notes in books like Energy and Civilization and How the World Really Works. But energy surrounds us. As I write this, there is energy pouring out of my desk light and pulsing through my computer.
Energy separates us from the pre-modern world. Energy application explains why we can feed 8 billion people easier than we could 1 billion. “In two centuries, the human labor to produce a kilogram of American wheat was reduced from 10 minutes to two seconds,” writes Smil. Think tractors, tractor trailers, highways, train tracks, fertilizer and irrigation. 
This massive rise in energy use is also (a duh) what is driving global warming. Smil calculates a 1,550 fold increase in the use of fossil fuels in the last 220 years. 
We face a paradox, which is that to meet the world’s future energy needs there is no available replacement to the substances whose heat cause droughts, volatile weather and climate migration. We can’t build a clean, natural gas powered jet airplane, for instance. At present, the choice is between a lower standard of living (countries where people walk rather than drive, continue to walk) or a lower standard of living through higher temperatures (think burnt crops and higher food prices). 
To be useful, energy needs to be reliable. For a hospital, for instance, to do what it is supposed to do, the ventilators, heart-lung machines and defibrillators need to work every time. 
Russia is a key node in a vast global energy infrastructure. Russia, along with Saudi and the US, is one of the top oil producers and is the second largest natural gas producer in the world. Russia has now proven itself an unreliable supplier.
While the US isn’t reliant on Russian energy, Europe and Asia are. By cutting off Europe to retaliate for their support of Ukraine, Russia is forcing Europeans to face another energy paradox. The choice is between a warm home or preventing war crimes. By next year, however, a new non-Russia European energy infrastructure will be more clearly evident, which relates to both what Buffet is doing and the stock market black box.
The Russian Black Box
Geography is destiny. Russia is a huge place with few people. Specifically, it is twice the size of the US with 45% the US population. 
Russian genius—Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky, Chekhov, Pasternak—reflects the peculiarities of living in a place that is both European and not. This touches every Russian. A Moscow-based doctor friend of mine described a stint he did as a resident in rural Russia. Between applying modern medicine to rural sick, he watched the head of maintenance attempt to slaughter a pig in the hospital basement. Where a knife failed, a gun succeeded. 
Putin is a variation on an ancient Russian theme. He is in the same medieval tradition of a Czar or General Secretary, only he wears Brioni suits, modern and not at once. Under Putin, Russia has slowly become a state that scares both its citizens and neighbors, much as it has over history. Poisoning rivals is palace intrigue. Seizing territory is old-school.  
The chief lives, as chiefs often do, increasingly in his own world. He applied his “in his own world” framework to Ukraine, where he promptly collided with a different framework, which is that people in the US and Europe oppose violent land grabs and are willing spend to a lot of money to stop them, as long as Ukrainians do the fighting. So far the US has pumped $7 billion into Ukraine, or 5% of Ukrainian GDP, with nary an objection. 
Until the invasion of Ukraine, the top Russia echelon enjoyed a standard of living higher than similar bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. or Brussels. Private planes and helicopters, vineyards in Italy, luxury real estate, multiple lovers were all within their grasp. A level below that, there were lots of Russians who enjoyed a level of wealth and comfort their grandparents could not imagine, as long as they avoided politics. That’s no longer true.
Now Putin is locked into a self-reinforcing cycle. If he admits defeat, he may end up like Romania’s Ceausescu or Italy’s Mussolini. That’s how the game is played in such structures. Stalin’s secret police chief Beria was promptly shot after Stalin died. For sure Putin knows this history.
Putin’s policy repels Russia’s talent. This seems counter productive and it is. Yet, the desire to stay in power can create behavior that is incomprehensible to outsiders. Who detonated last week’s car bomb in Moscow? Like bomb blasts during the Lebanese Civil War (1975-90), it’s almost impossible to know; my Russian contacts immediately suspected the FSB. 
Case study on diversification. I know two Russian businessmen. Both are rags to riches stories. When one of them started he literally had a single pair of pants to his name. They both made a lot of money, in part by learning how to operate a business in a system with weak rule of law. One of them took his money and bought commercial real estate in Moscow with a modest amount of debt. The other took his money and bought commerical real estate in the US with no debt. The yield (or rent as a percentage of purchase price) was much lower (less attractive) in the US but rule of law much clearer than in Russia. The businessman who bought the US building thought of it as a hedge against Russia imploding. The other businessman has lost, as far as I can tell, everything. The Russia building has seen its value collapse and the bank refused to roll over his debt, rags to riches to rags.
The Stock Market Black Box
For many, the stock market is something they rely upon but is one more black box. If the US stock market goes through a period like it did from the late 1960s to the early 1980s where its return is zero, it won’t feel so reliable. Right now I believe cash, which yields above 3%, is more attractive than stocks, which have fallen about 14% this year and I suspect will fall further.1
The stock market allows companies with future spending plans to raise capital and, normally, savers a place to make more money than they would in cash. The question is always at what price this transaction will take place.
Stocks have fallen (prices are more attractive) because there is less money to buy them. The central bank is printing less money, so there is less money in the economy overall, the stock market is collateral damage. 
The central bank is printing less for obvious reasons—inflation is high. From here, the central bank is priced (in the bond market) to increase short-term interest rates to 3.8% from where they are now, 2.3%.2 
All data is backward looking, we know what has happened, not what will happen. The data is probably going to show the economy slowing and inflation slowing. Each time data shows inflation falling, the stock market will likely jump a bit. But the key thing is that the level of inflation (stripping out volatile prices like energy) is around 4% and needs to get to 2%, which is a big downward shift.
Inflation has four big moving parts: housing, wages, foreign goods, and commodities. The path to lower inflation is lower wages, which means higher unemployment. In a poll, 85% of respondents are now worried about losing their jobs yet, so far, not that many people are actually losing jobs. Until they do, inflation will likely be too high, which means less printing. Commodity prices have already fallen, but lower housing prices and a less tangled supply chain will take a while to feed into the inflation numbers.
What to do? I can’t advise you. Here is what I am doing, for you to take or leave. I’ve got about a 30% position in cash. I put my stock market hedge back on (via futures) over the course of last week. I should probably make it a bit bigger. I hold two year bonds and have sold 10 year bonds and should make that bigger. In many cases, companies that create images (think Netflix) costs more than companies that create energy, even with Netflix’s 60% fall this year. We can probably do without Netflix for a month or two. Not so much natural gas or the companies that collect and ship other forms of energy now that Russia is being cut out of Western energy infrastructure. I own stocks tied to the capture and distribution of energy like (EQT) pipelines (ET, EPD, PAA) or sea-borne transportation (AGAS), among others. In a bear market, these stocks can get crushed, so I own a bigger hedge than the stock exposure, but if I am going to own anything, energy and energy infrastructure is what feels safe both because of where it is priced and because of how central it is to civilization.  Asset allocation and unaudited results below. As always, write me with questions. I answer my email, paul@paulpodolsky.com.
1 A note on style. Among subscribers, some are themselves portfolio managers and some are very smart people with little familiarity with the stock market black box. For that reason, I write in a less technical and the experts can skip parts that are already familiar to them.
2 Technical explanation (finance geeks skip). What I’ve just said is, I suspect, overlooked by almost everyone buying stocks. When people say “the Fed need’s to raise rates” it doesn’t mean much. What matters is if they raise rates above those rates already in the market. Where are those rates? You won’t find them in the paper. But traders with Bloomberg machines stare at them. You can see them here, but they are displayed in a way that is difficult to understand. 
