Russia, One-Off or Precedent
Observing Russia is disturbing. How disturbing is in part a function of distance. When the war broke out, I was a few hours away in Cyprus. Later, in New England, an ocean separated me and I felt safer. Last week, driving Palo Alto’s Sand Hill Road, the idea of a Russia-like swing in US politics felt implausible. But what if what is unfolding in Russia is a disease that can spread?

If we measure “spread” as loss of life, the disease is spreading to eastern Ukraine. If Ukraine beats Russia conventionally, the risks of Putin using tactical nukes rises, another terrifying form of spread. If Russia’s descent—initially gradual, then faster—into paranoid, aggrieved authoritarianism occurs in the country you reside in, then the spread is complete.

Maybe what we are seeing is unique to Russia, a one-off.  In 1917, Russian politics was roughly as developed as England in the late 1600s.1 Perhaps they are still catching up, in fits and starts.

On the other hand, strongman rule is neither new nor uncommon. In the 1930s, Germany was the epicenter. Tomorrow, France votes Macron vs. Le Pen.  Turkey, Hungary, Brazil, the Philippines and China are all under the sway of such leaders.

The root cause of such shifts seems to be a combination of our own wiring, chaotic economic change, new media, aggrieved national pride, specific political culture and a charismatic leader. The parallels of 1930s Germany and modern Russia are haunting. WW1 = collapse of the Soviet Union; 1923 hyper-inflation = 1990s economic collapse, etc.

Wealth & Education Make a US Version Unlikely…Sort Of

Given both the above precedents and of course January 6, the odds of the US falling under the sway of an authoritarian leader are above zero but, at first glance, don’t seem very high, either. The Western formula is civil rights + free press + educated public + representative government = a gradual evolution in rules such that liberty is preserved and wealth increases.  

Over time, this system has created stunning, uneven, increases in wealth, as the chart below from Rose Technology shows.



Interruptions have been due to a) civil war b) global conflict and c) central bank policy error (1929 and 2008). The system is set up such that it isn’t easy for the politicians to significantly de-rail the economy, which is an important contrast to an authoritarian system with less checks on power (think Cultural Revolution).



To be sure, this story is true in aggregate, not the specific. The experience of slaves and their descendants looks different. Still, today a record high percentage of citizens holds a four-year college degree which, together with the wealth, suggests risks of a full-scale retreat from rule of law are overblown.



Weakening Faith in Elections

For calculating politicians, ideology is simply a tool to open the door to power. Trump was particularly brilliant with inventing stories that resonated, especially on social media, whose algorithms (while secret) favor outrage. After he lost and against all evidence including his own Attorney General, Trump said the election was stolen. About 25% of Americans identify as Republican, of which 70% believe him.



That suggests 20% of the US population will support an authoritarian leader today. Uncertainty over reliability of US elections has led to a sharp deterioration in the perception of the US as a safe bet (lower means worse) though so far this is showing up more in polls than in the pricing of assets.



Motivations to support an authoritarian leader vary. In the US, there is a racial element.  What spans countries (Turkey, France, etc.) is economics and information. The modern economy creates concentrated wealth, which is then discussed on splintered social media.



The current spike in inflation, which drives real wages down, will make this even worse.  But real wages are not a sound-bite-ready concept and many of the candidates themselves are extremely wealthy. A better target is needed to stir up the vote.

Finding the Right Shark

As discussed in my podcast about story, a good story needs an inciting incident, like the shark in Jaws. The question is if the politician’s shark will be one that threatens to destroy rule of law or not and also how viral the story is. If you are ambitious and watched Trump’s success, the temptations must be mighty.   

Imagine being Florida’s Ron DeSantis. The 43-year-old Yale and Harvard educated Governor knows he could, a la Bill Clinton, jump from State-house to President. How to play his cards?

So far, DeSantis has stopped short, as far as I can tell, of claiming US elections are rigged, even as he lauds Trump.2 Instead, he has used what he deems the excesses of political correctness as his shark, thus his attack on Disney over opposing a law (HB 1557) about sex education and what is known as the “stop woke act” (HB 7).3

This is a Twitter-informed strategy. One bill attacks a difficult to define term (“woke”) that polls show many Americans dislike.4 In truth, there is likely broad agreement on the need to teach US history well—both the bright spots and the blights. DeSantis isn’t dumb, he is looking at the information channels.



The Walter Cronkite world I grew up in is as dead as the typewriter. Even Anderson and Tucker are afterthoughts relative to those with 100 million plus followers on Twitter. Trump’s mendacious tweets weren’t as successful as Barack or Katy Perry, but pretty close.  Putin’s stated Ukraine objective is de-Nazification and, speaking with my Moscow-based mother-in-law, that lie resonates quite well. As long as only a minority of Americans believe big lies, we are probably OK. Still, it’s kinda scary.

I owe you a longer update on investment strategy. My basic view is unchanged: the Fed is removing liquidity, which will drag down all assets. After gaining some, I’ve lost some and am now up about 1% this year. Frustrating. My portfolio is basically short US bonds, modestly short US stocks, long commodities and long commodity producing companies. The commodity producing companies got crushed the last few days as the force of the Fed liquidity withdrawal turned out to be stronger than the force of the increase in their earnings, which should be great given how high raw material prices are. As opposed to an open mic “ask me anything,” if subscribers send me your questions direct to paul@paulpodolsky.com I will do my best to answer them in a follow up post. Thanks for your support.

1
In 1689, the UK Parliament deposed a sitting sovereign.

2
https://www.wfla.com/news/florida/gov-desantis-refuses-to-answer-whether-he-thinks-2020-election-was-rigged/

3
https://www.abcactionnews.com/news/state/governor-desantis-signs-so-called-stop-woke-act-into-law

4
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2018/10/large-majorities-dislike-political-correctness/572581/

A Conversation with Neuroscientist David Linden
We are wired a bit funny, according to Johns Hopkins neuroscientist David Linden. Our brains send us contradictory thoughts and emotions. We also want to predict the future even when some things, like imagining a world we are no longer a part of, is impossible. You can hear the full conversation here.

“When I really try to engage with my own demise, I think my mind skates over the glossy surface of it,” said David.

David speaks from the perspective of a researcher immersed in the data, an author—Unique, A Compass of Pleasure, The Accidental Mind—and a person facing a terminal cancer diagnosis. At the time of our talk, he said he had months to live, a topic he broached in this Atlantic article.

“I got heart cancer and that stinks,” said David. At the same time, he said he felt “wonderfully grateful because I’ve had a great life and great opportunities.”

We can hold two opposing ideas as true even in the face of death. We can “feel simultaneously angry and grateful,” he said. If I were the one with the diagnosis, I don’t know if I’d be able to feel as grateful as David. I hope by some magic he will be cured even as I recognize that that thought is not anchored to reality or the odds, another example of contradictory ideas.

I am grateful David spent the time with me and that I can share this with you. In his most recent book, Unique, David blows up the notion of nature versus nurture. Instead, the accurate perspective is that individual traits are due to “heredity, interacting with experience filtered through the inherent randomness of development.” All three can interact and reinforce each other.

As a species, we crave solid experiences, a firm ground under our feet. Yet, our lives are more like water—fluid, placid one day and dangerously turbulent the next. Be it disease or Ukraine or financial market volatility, reality is more treacherous than we sometimes allow ourselves to admit, thus our shock when faced with a sudden shift in circumstances. “One way to feel in control, to not stop having agency, is to be curious,” said David.

A number of readers asked me about Ukraine and financial markets. I will write more about this next week. Below is a brief answer to each.

In terms of Ukraine, as I noted in March’s It’s Going to Get Worse in March, the sane are trying to counter the unhinged (Putin). That’s why the West is pouring ever stronger weapons into Ukraine. At the same time, Russia is cutting off energy supplies to Europe, which means funding for the Kremlin’s war machine is getting more strained, which increases the odds Putin loses. The greater the risk of loss, the higher the odds Russia uses nukes. If before the Ukraine invasion the risk of nukes was close to zero, now it is well above that. Let that sink in. There is a risk nuclear weapons are used. As David said, it’s hard for our minds not to skate over “the glossy surface” of that.

In terms of the US stock market,

I am also worried. Ukraine + slowing US growth + bad economic growth in China + rising global bond yields is not good. As of this writing, US stocks and bonds are each down about 14% this year, while inflation is running at 8% meaning the typical US household has seen the real value of their savings fall by around 16%! What you pay at the pump is a small affront in comparison.

My views are NOT investment advice. I share with you what I am thinking and doing for you to take or leave. As I noted in January’s The Tide Goes Out, this is a tricky time to invest. I am down about 1%.1 If stocks go up, this increases the risk the central bank tightens a lot, which is bad for stocks. If Russia goes nuclear, stocks get crushed. All this as the price investors pay for US stocks is still quite high.

Below is a long-term chart on the price of US stocks. There are lots of ways of calculating these numbers and no one way is precise. But it is still a useful exercise. If prices come closer to their historical average or even a bit below, or if interest rates rise further, US stocks are significantly overvalued. Look how far prices fell in the 1970s.

Too Many Tech Bros, Not Enough Frackers
Welcome! If this was forwarded to you, you can read what I am up to here or sign up to receive the free or paid version below. This week is both an essay and a Mother’s Day podcast with my amazing wife Marina, which you can hear here.

Subscribe now

The future is always murky, the past obvious by comparison. The degree to which the future becomes miraculous­­ or awful depends on how well each generation discerns and invests in that murky future.  Miraculous looks like mRNA vaccines, 1G internet and driverless electric cars. Awful are Russia’s collapsing living standards. 

Until relatively recently, the murky future was supposed to be carbon neutral, cash flow negative tech start-ups. But that vision turns out to have been wildly misguided. Inflation is high and tech workers are getting sacked because we invested too little in oil and natural gas and too much in tech. This miscalculation was exacerbated by easy money, Covid and Ukraine. Below, courtesy of Rose, is a picture of the “capex,” basically investment, of the two sectors. Oops.



In popular culture, Wall Street is often portrayed as the villain. While there are unsavory people on Wall Street, the ecosystem itself provides an invaluable service—directing capital toward the future.1 But doing so is more art than science despite the amount of math types involved. This has implications for central planning and instability.

Central planning doesn’t work well because trying to figure out what tomorrow’s miracle inventions should be is hard even in a system where people are incentivized to do just that. In the US, Katalin Kariko, whose research led to the mRNA vaccines, was refused grant after grant and demoted by the University of Pennsylvania!2 How likely is a Politburo member to see what the venture/biotech/academic community missed? Yes, Chinese central planning lifted hundreds of millions out of poverty, though this was more catch up following decades of chaos (Civil War plus Cultural Revolution) using a relatively clear development template­. Regarding instability, the murkiness of the future means it is inherently difficult to value a company––either to work in or to own a part of. This means the likelihood of losing a job or money on an investment in any particular sector is high.

Haliburton Vs. Netflix

When you work for a company or invest in its stock, you are renting out your labor or your money. The goal is to rent out either for as much as possible.  Counterintuitively, the higher the price of the company, typically the less you receive for rent. As prices on tech soared and those on dirty energy companies plummeted, the rent received tilted more and more in favor of energy and away from tech.     

Today’s pricing shows how much and how quickly perceptions can shift. A one-time darling like Netflix is down 70% this year and a company that helps pull oil out of the ground, Halliburton, is up 60%. One stock market, but two very different stories.  

In part this pricing is because processing one-off “shocks” is hard for humans. We are designed to spot patterns, which requires repetition. To make sense of the pandemic, we looked to 1918, but failed to anticipate the vaccines or China’s zero Covid policy. In the chaos, the price of oil actually went negative.  Now there is Ukraine, which creates the risk of a nuclear conflict. How do you price that?

Each shock shifts hundreds of billions of dollars. Wall Street doesn’t do “reverse” very well. The machine is set up to sell securities around a story to investors that hold them and benefit from future price rises. Wall Street is not incentivized, by and large, to warn investors or build portfolios to protect when prices fall. That’s why most portfolios are down so much this year.

More Pain Ahead

Going forward, we are likely in a negatively self-reinforcing dynamic that will last for a while (investment implications a bit lower down). The shortage of oil due to underinvestment is exacerbated when countries cut their demand for Russian oil. Consumers need about the same amount of oil, but supply is less so price rises.

Oil is inflation, or at least a big part of it, which is what the chart below shows.



Oil is in your heating and driving and the cost of every Amazon delivery you get. This means the Fed now needs to tighten even more. Earnings will likely slow and PE’s likely fall as interest rates rise. As I showed last week, it isn’t difficult to see how stock prices could fall another 20%, though this is not investment advice.  Plus, there is China’s zero Covid policy, which has further disrupted supply chains, which is also inflationary. The Fed can’t solve a supply-chain problem, so it needs to throttle demand.

We will hit bottom when prices cool. But this might take a while. For instance, re-routing energy infrastructure is likely to take a few years. This is both because building new facilities, like natural gas terminals in Europe, takes time and also because in the West there is resistance to new energy infrastructure. The example frequently cited is that Quebec has a surplus of hydro power but environmental opposition has prevented the construction of 192-mile transmission line through New Hampshire.3

Despite these facts, investors believe a much brighter future still awaits technology, perhaps because these companies have the possibility of creating something that is almost free—like the technology behind TikTok—that can reach billions of people. Said differently, rent is still lower in tech perhaps in part because the economies of scale are so alluring.



Russia Update & Mother’s Day Podcast:

The news from Russia is so bizarre it is difficult to process. Last week, Russia’s foreign minister equated Ukraine’s Jewish leader, Zelensky, with Hitler, adding the weird lie that Hitler also had “Jewish blood.”4 A chunk of Russia, including my mother-in-law, seems to have lost their mind. There is a tape I posted on Twitter (@paul_podolsky) of captured Russian soldiers calling their mothers, saying they managed to survive and that the whole attack is a waste. Their own mothers tell them to stop complaining and eliminate the “Nazis.” Propaganda works much better than I had ever imagined. My source in all things Russia is my wife Marina and I recorded a special Mother’s day podcast here.

Investment Outlook

How to navigate the dynamic I’ve described above? By doing things differently than normal. In practice

that means abandoning the 60/40 (stock/bond) portfolio. Here is how I am navigating this though this is NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE, YOU GET TO SEE WHAT I AM DOING AS I DO IT. MY PORTFOLIO CAN AND WILL LOSE MONEY AT POINTS IN TIME.

I reduced risk. Markets are so volatile you don’t need much risk to make money.

I am aiming (almost there) to have a portfolio that is about 2 parts short stocks, 1 part short bonds and 1.5 parts long commodity producing companies.

Right now this portfolio looks like the below. I’ve been up about 3% this year, down 2% and now am back to flat. I plan to increase the risk if there is a reversal that offers better pricing.





Book list:

A number of readers asked me for a reading list to learn more about the topics discussed here. Below is a start. I can add to this over time.

Non-fiction:

Axilrod, Inside the Fed

Bernstein, The Power of Gold, Against the Gods

Bresciani – The Economics of Inflation

Buffet, Warren. The Essays of Warren Buffet

Eichengreen, Other People’s Money

Graham, The Interpretation of Financial Statements

Fabozzi, Fixed Income Mathematics.

Ferguson, When Money Dies

Friedman, A Monetary History of the United States

Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money

Krugman, Sign up for his newsletter

Hayek, The Road to Serfdom

Homer, A history of Interest rates

Kissinger, The Age of AI, World Order

Judt, Postwar.

Liaquat, The Lords of Finance.

Lefevre, Reminiscences of a Stock Operator

Lowenstein, Too Big to Fail, Buffet

Mahar, Maggie. Bull

MacLean, Bethany, The Smartest Guy in the Room

Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies

Smil, Energy and Civilization.

Stewart, Den of Thieves

Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago

Spence, The Search for Modern China

Steil, The Battle of Bretton Woods

Soros, George. The Alchemy of Finance

Taleb, Fooled by Randomness

Wigmore, The Crash and Its Aftermath

Fiction:

Cervantes, Don Quixote

Hugo, Victor. Les Misérables.

Tolstoy, War and Peace

1
If you want to see what the alternative looks like, look at North Korea. Or, in my case, recall the Soviet Union. Take away capital markets and you take away a lot of magic that just appears in the west, without much thought.

2
The story of mRNA: How a once-dismissed idea became a leading technology in the Covid vaccine race



3
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2017/08/f35/EIS-0463-FEIS-Summary.pdf

Zero Covid Lessons

Concepts are less persuasive than actual experience. You know, in the abstract, car crashes are undesirable; then you are in one and the scream of tires, metal crunching into glass and a massive adrenaline jolt forever changes your perception of risk. Covid is doing the same, particularly in China.

China’s Covid experience forces the recognition of a simple truth—in an authoritarian system, the only thing that matters is who is in charge. There may be an army of intelligent, hard working, thoughtful technocrats beneath the Leader (and in China there are), but they lack power. Given fewer constraints, the Leader can either move a country ahead like Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew or veer off course, like Mao or Putin.

Xi’s Covid leadership, which once looked shrewd, is exacting an increasingly high cost, including:

Hundreds of millions of Chinese locked in their homes for weeks,

A contracting economy, which will depress global growth and earnings.

Snarled global supply chains, which will make inflation more persistent and

China’s elite beginning to wonder if their system’s flaws are intolerably high, which may lead to more brain drain.

To make things even more complicated, despite China’s reality and Putin’s disastrous Ukraine invasion, a significant slice of the US and Europe supports their own home-grown authoritarian leaders.

When Policy Touches You, Perceptions Shift

While China’s initial Covid control was better than the US and Europe, the latest Omicron variant has upended Zhongnanhai’s strategy. The CCP locked down China’s equivalent of New York City—Shanghai—on … March 28. Many other cities are similarly impacted.1 Stories and footage includes children, wailing, separated from parents who test positive and are forcibly removed, families locked inside their apartment with bolts (fire risk?), people denied medical care for urgent non-Covid conditions while others look for food.2

Up until this point, President Xi’s version of socialism with Chinese characteristics did not, by and large, directly touch many of China’s elite or it did so in way that could be downplayed. The arrest and in some cases execution of hundreds of thousands of corrupt officials and CEOs, the attack on tech giants, renditions and the crackdown on Hong Kong caught the attention of the foreign press but seemed periphery to the business and personal lives of many in China.

A heavy handed leader was like bad weather, something out of one’s control to be tolerated with as much grace as possible. Talking too directly about politics, particularly with a foreigner, was considered poor taste. Moreover, from the Chinese elite’s perspective, the West produced riots, high crime, refrigerated trucks stacked with Covid corpses and Trump, hardly the signs of a superior system.

Now the duration of China’s lockdown is shifting perceptions. The vaccines readily available in China don’t work well3 and President Xi is not willing to either admit that or buy mRNA vaccines. The elite is increasingly talking about keeping kids who are abroad abroad for longer and themselves getting residency permits elsewhere, like in Singapore, or moving money abroad.

By the way, I saw the same in Russia. It was easy to ignore Putin’s increasingly poor policy choices until they became too extreme and hundreds of thousands of the best software engineers, doctors and business people hastily fled. Similarly, Xi’s crackdown in Hong Kong is leading to an outflow of talent. I’ve shared the chart below before, poverty and authoritarian control drive people away.4



China’s Lockdown Contributes to Global Stagflation When Assets Are Expensive

To be sure, Xi faces a dilemma both in terms of perception and tactics. Admitting China’s own vaccines don’t work well would be a blow to prestige. One of Xi’s core aspirations has been to restore China’s pride after what is widely known as a century plus of foreign humiliation at the hands of the Brits, French, Japanese and Russians. Today, Chinese propaganda blames the US for much that is wrong with today’s world, including the war in Ukraine. Moreover, if Xi loosens controls, Chinese will die. China’s own scientists suggest over 1 million will lose their lives.5

However, the longer Xi maintains zero Covid, the more China’s economy weakens and supply chain problems worsen. China is the second biggest economy in the world, but it typically grows faster than the US, meaning the contribution to global growth is bigger out of China than the US. Said differently, the more Xi insists on maintaining his current policy, the more we enter a stagflationary (low growth, high inflation) environment. The companies you hold in your portfolio—like Apple and others—sell a lot of product in China, so expect earnings to be hit.

As I noted last week, the Federal Reserve can’t control supply chains. All they can control is demand, which clearly needs to fall a lot to get inflation lower. Even though US stocks and bonds have been hammered this year (down over 15%), prices have actually not adjusted that much relative to history. Below is an updated chart from Yale’s Robert Shiller on the PE or cost of buying a share of earnings. PEs were about 10 the last time inflation was a big problem. If earnings stay the same as they are now (which seems doubtful) and PEs fall from where they are right now (20 as opposed to the trailing number Schiller uses), that is still a significant re-pricing of stocks. (THIS IS NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE).



Chaos and Control Versus Happy Medium

Why Xi follows such a policy is complicated. Before the pandemic, I traveled to China regularly, not only the major cities like Beijing and Shanghai but also to Harbin, Kunming, Nanjing and others. I like China, my Chinese friends and got a thrill out of speaking my limited but enthusiastic Chinese.

China is a tough place to administer with, historically, two modes—authoritarian control or disorder. There are few periods where they find a happy medium. Of course, that’s over simplifying 5000 years of history. At the same time, it’s difficult to understand someone like Xi without having a sketch of Chinese 20th century history in your mind.

The current heavy-handed structure comes after wrenching historical change. Like Russia, China had a monarch up to the early 20th century. In other words, the system of government had not significantly evolved in thousands of years even as technology transformed the West. Europe began to edge away from a Sovereign, in fits and starts, in the Middle Ages. In England that transition is still underway.

Once that last Chinese dynasty collapsed in 1911, it was not replaced with anything coherent. For much of the first half of the 20th century warlords controlled different areas and foreign invaders took over massive slices of territory. Stumbling efforts to create and enforce a Constitution and rule of law by leaders like Sun Yet-sen failed.

As with Russia, Communists stepped into this leadership void. Communist ideology was a more modest adjustment from a dynastic one compared to Democracy. Communism preserved authoritarian leadership but transferred the process of selecting a chief to what the Communists believed was a meritocracy.

Xi is the inheritor of that history and operates within its confines though, like an emperor, his power is largely unchecked. This type of structure is brittle. That’s one reason why so many emperors don’t die natural deaths, as my guest Yuhua Wang noted in a March podcast. For more background on China, check out my podcast with Gao Xiqing.

The US Variant

The US approach to Covid is also instructive. About 1 million are dead, due in part to a disorganized initial response and also because 40% of the population won’t take the vaccine. However, most US readers of these posts have benefitted enormously from access to mRNA vaccines and can now largely live as they did pre-Covid. Despite the apparently obvious contrast between Russia, China and the US, a significant part of the US craves authoritarian leadership.

Like authoritarian leaders everywhere, Trump offers simple slogans for a complex reality. Only a minority of the country are strong Trump supporters, but only a minority supported Russia’s Bolsheviks or China’s CCP, too. Recall that 147 members of Congress, or 27%, voted to overturn the 2020 election.6 If the opposition isn’t well organized or given to infighting, they lose, which is what happened to China’s early 20th century democracy supporters. If 24% more of the US Congress becomes sympathetic with Trumpism, watch out. Almost certainly high inflation and a collapsing stock market will be blamed on Democrats and increase the odds of such a cataclysmic rupture.

Investment Implications

There are a few of them. First, regarding overall asset allocation, given where inflation is (high) and the Fed hiking (still early), I think assets remain unattractive. If 60% stocks, 40% bonds is the normal asset allocation a typical mutual fund recommends, I am -18% stocks, -5% bonds and +9% long commodity producers with the rest in illiquid credit, real estate or hedge funds. In other words, I am far from the typical portfolio. I’ve also got a lot of cash. Second, I’ve pulled all my money from Russia and China. Watching what is going on in Ukraine, you’d think that Xi would renounce any effort to take Taiwan. But he isn’t doing that. In fact, he has stepped up military drills. Given that I can’t predict if he will or won’t attack Taiwan, for a US-based investor like me Chinese assets are too risky. I will be watching the mid-term and 2024 elections in the US carefully. If things get sticky, I will look at moving money abroad. THIS IS NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE. INVESTMENT INVOLVES RISK OF LOSS. I’VE EXPERIENCED THAT LOTS OF TIMES.

1
https://qz.com/2164102/nearly-400-million-people-are-under-covid-lockdown-in-china/

2
https://time.com/6175179/shanghai-covid-lockdown-residents/

3
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-021-02796-w

4
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-03-07/hong-kong-exodus-continues-with-record-number-of-people-leaving

5
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/science/article/3177236/removing-chinas-covid-controls-could-result-15-million-deaths

6
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/01/07/us/elections/electoral-college-biden-objectors.html

The Hedgehog vs. The Fox

Frameworks are mental shortcuts that, while inaccurate, organize reality. An ancient but useful one is the distinction between the hedgehog and the fox. “The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing,” wrote the ancient Greek poet Archilochus. Hedgehogs rely on one trick to survive—playing dead—while foxes employ many. Similarly, some thinkers rely on a single idea used again and again to make sense of reality while others shift tactics and frameworks.1 On social media and in politics, hedgehogs do well. But if the goal is understanding and preserving wealth, it is helpful to find your inner fox.

Politics

A combination of economic shifts (the rise of tech and finance) and information shifts (Twitter versus TV news) has led to a weakening of the center and a strengthening of the fringes. The center is by definition the territory of foxes, while the fringes are solidly hedgehog.

For instance, because a former colleague was running for office in Pennsylvania, I tracked the primary there with more attention than I normally would have. The Republican nominee for Governor, Doug Mastriano, ran on a campaign that asserts President Biden didn’t win.2 This is a classic hedgehog strategy—Trump is always right, the only way he lost is because the election was rigged.

The fox’s perspective is different. On the one hand, Trump less led a movement than was created by one. A combination of forces (not just one), including flat real wages driven by global competition, 2008 housing market volatility, a collapse in traditional media, the opioid epidemic and the arrival at the pinnacles of power of Black leaders like Obama disturbed a portion of the population.

The particular issue that riled varied by voter. It’s less that Trump is right than that the forces that created him are real. That’s why these forces are so similar across countries. Macron versus Le Pen, Putin versus Navalny (though Navalny is in the role of the fox), Zelensky versus Yanukovich, the ousted Ukraine leader who fled to Russia.

This hedgehog/fox trade-off is more acute in authoritarian countries like Russia and China. In Russia, the hedgehog strategy is to say that the government successfully defended the motherland against fascism in the 1940s and is doing so again now. The fox perspective recognizes that Russia was the victim of fascism in the 1940s, but is now the perpetrator. A fox realizes order can be turned on its head. Similarly, in China central planning both created enormous wealth but could also destroy it.

Investing

In investing, the hedgehog strategy is to hold a portfolio of stocks and bonds for the long-term and add to it when the portfolio declines in value, as it has this year. This philosophy is espoused in lots of investment books and mutual fund companies. The 60% of the money in stocks makes most of the money, and the 40% of the money in bonds offers some cushion when the stocks falter. It is indeed true that over time, particularly in the US, this strategy has provided fantastic returns over the long-term.

A fox looks at this differently. Most of the return of this type of investment strategy occurs when the central bank is printing money. When they are tightening, reducing the amount of money in circulation, this is a money losing strategy. (THIS IS NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE. INVESTING INVOLVES RISK). In fact, when the liquidity tide goes out, it is better to do the opposite—sell stocks and bonds, as the chart below from Rose Technology shows. Note how bad the losses are in the 1970s when inflation became a big issue.



Right now the Federal Reserve needs to tighten a lot to get inflation from 8% or higher down to something like 2%. Of course, this involves timing the market, which is notoriously difficult.

To make money in this environment, one needs to be very comfortable with “shorting,” not for the faint of heart. Losses when the strategy doesn’t work are essentially unlimited. But the basic idea is that you can make money when prices are too high, just as you can make money when they are too low. You just need to flip your perspective upside down. You sell the S&P 500 to someone at the price where it began the year—4785—and buy the shares back and repay the loan wherever the stock market settles, or you think it settles.

The fox’s perspective gets more support when you look at returns from an international perspective. When things get really messy, like the 1923 German Weimar inflation, an investor can suffer losses from which, essentially, they never recover. I’m not saying that will happen now. I’m saying it has happened and the fox is ready to abandon an entire school of thought if needed to survive and flee to a different country. That sounds extreme from a US perspective, but not from a German, French, Venezuelan, Brazilian, Chinese, etc. perspective.



There is also an important point about emotion in this. A lot of investment advice argues the need to be “rational,” to look at the numbers act mechanically, like a machine. Rationality is certainly critical, though also pure hedgehog. A fox recognizes that emotion and intuition have power and can sometimes lead logic. The best strategy is incorporating logic and emotion. Hedge fund legend George Soros famously sold his positions when he developed a back ache. It’s also true that jittery investors often buy and sell at the wrong times, so this strategy too can lead to terrible problems, which is why hedgehog thinking is comforting.

Literature

The hedgehog/fox dichotomy was brought back to life by Isiah Berlin in an essay I attached in the footnote. He applied his analysis to Leo Tolstoy and War and Peace. He argues that Tolstoy was in fact a fox—he viewed things from multiple perspectives—but tried to act as if he was a hedgehog and it is this tension that tortured Tolstoy and made his great novels so intriguing.

Tolstoy’s hedgehog idea was that the way history was told was essentially a lie, a grand distortion. As opposed to big figures like Napoleon shaping history, in reality many small decisions by individuals coalesce to create an impossible to precisely describe reality. Napoleon and other leaders have the arrogance to think they could organize and direct, but in reality the great Leader is as much a person in the flow of history as anyone else, according to Tolstoy.

The truth, Tolstoy realized, was somewhere in between. Individuals do have a degree of free will, to move their arm or drink a coffee, and in positions of great power (like a Federal Reserve chief or Putin) can undertake actions that will influence millions. But at the same time, there are also limits to how much free will there is. Certainly Putin’s ideas about Ukraine have, particularly with the Nordics now looking to join NATO and Ukraine advancing, spectacularly backfired as have the Fed’s predictions about inflation.

By the way, that’s one of the reasons I push all people, particularly young people, to read both fiction and non-fiction. Non-fiction is the idea, facts. Fiction is emotions, individual lives. War and Peace is remarkable because it tries to do both.

Where We Are Now

As opposed to a single idea driving our reality right now, there are multiple and they are all in motion, like pendulums. Globalization swung power from country to city, now the pendulum is swinging back. Changes to abortion laws in the US reflects those shifts. Central banks printed too much, now they are swinging back and will need to print too little, thus the market downdraft. Covid shrunk our world to our homes, now the pendulum is swinging back to a new found appreciation for travel. We were infatuated with the future of technology now, based on the stock prices, that over exuberance is shifting to pessimism. The world, as always, is in motion though maybe that is the bias of a fox or perahps believing that change is eternal make me a hedgehog.

Investment Implications

In this dynamic, I try to keep it very simple, or as simple as I can. After goofing up earlier in the year. I have settled into an asset allocation that seems to work OK. The allocations is roughly 20% short stocks, 27% short bonds, about 10% long illiquid credit and 10% long commodity producers and 10% long hedge funds. This has made money this month…and pushed me up to positive year to date (unaudited returns). I lost money in January and April. This puts me somewhere between true foxes, that are up double digits this year, and dedicated hedgehogs, that are down double digits. Allocating money is always painful. When the bets are right, too little money is at stake. And when they are wrong, too much.

Our season #4 of podcasts is pretty much done. I’ll send out a round up next week and then we will take a podcast break while Dave and I record new episodes. As always, reach out with questions.

1
This concept is drawn from the essay by Isiah Berlin. You can read the full text here: https://www.blogs.hss.ed.ac.uk/crag/files/2016/06/the_hedgehog_and_the_fox-berlin.pdf

Complexity and Adaptation

If you are new to Things I Didn’t Learn in School you can see what I am up to here. If you want to skip directly to my conversation with poet Heidi Seaborn, click this link. Also, last night, The Wall Street Journal published a piece I wrote about family and Putin’s propaganda, which you can read here. For US readers, happy Memorial Day!

“When in God’s name are we going to stand up to the gun lobby,” President Biden asked this week.1 It’s one thing if I ask this question and quite another if the President does. Put aside that the NRA is bankrupt2, the question is a reminder the most powerful man in the world has limited power. All civilizations face challenges—like students getting slaughtered at school—the test is if they are flexible enough to adjust to them.

Success Fuels Complexity

Any organizational system—be it national, corporate or familial—must adapt to new information in order to survive. A system needs to be rigid enough to endure and flexible enough to evolve. The trick is that the more successful a given organizational system, the bigger and more complex it becomes, challenging its ability to adapt.

A single generation successful family becomes multi-generational. A start up goes from a small team to tens of thousands. A country grows, pulling in talent from less functional regions.

Failure to adapt is more the rule than the exception. The average company remains in one of the leading stock market averages for about 10 years, as I wrote in All Companies Die. In the last 1500 years, the average Chinese dynasty lasted 248 years. The US is 244 years old and I hope its relative flexibility allows it to outlive the Chinese average. If one shooter can do that much evil, imagine what a breakdown in order looks like?

The higher chances US children have of being shot is tied to 18th century operating instructions that also stipulate the civil liberties these children grow up to enjoy. Changing one without destroying the other requires a legislative flexibility that has eluded the US Congress. This despite the fact that 83% of Americans support background checks.3



The US has never tried to find compromise at this scale. The US population was 4 million in 1787 when the Constitution was written. When Joe Biden was born the population was 132 million. It is now 332 million and continues to draw in people from all over the world given a delicate combination of favorable geography, rule of law and ability to make money. Smaller countries, like Australia, cracked down hard on the sale of automatic weapons after a single incident.4

Gun Control One Issue of Many

The high polled desire for background checks and terrible legislative follow through doesn’t bode well for problems that also require delicate cooperation, like climate change. One hundred years ago, the use of fossil fuels was much lower but so too were living standards—one rose with the other. Emissions improved during the pandemic, but economic activity collapsed. We need to figure out how to grow the economy without heating the air.

More immediately, the stock market and inflation are each complex systems that, unlike legislation, are easily measured. They are both beholden to a lot of people (the buyers and sellers) but also just one person, the Fed chief. Going forward, difficult choices await.

We got to this point via a series of unfortunate events. A pandemic struck. So the central bank printed a ton of money to help stimulate demand, part of which ended up in the stock market, which made people feel good, and part of which ended up in higher prices, which made people upset. China’s lockdown and Ukraine made already bad inflation even worse.

So far all that’s happened is the price we pay for a stock has come down, driving the stock market lower. But inflation is still high. To reduce inflation, the next thing that is likely to happen and may already be happening, is that the economy needs to slow. If this happens, companies will make less money. This, in turn, will probably drive the stock market down further, notwithstanding this week’s rise. A further decline may or may not provoke a panic, which perhaps marks the bottom (NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE), unless of course a new crisis arises to take the place of the ones that currently capture our attention.

Podcast

Heidi Seaborn is a poet and the author of An Insomniac’s Slumber Party with Marilyn Monroe. What fascinated me about Heidi was not only her work, but her journey. She sensed she was a poet as a teenager, then buried that desire during a corporate career and raising children only to turn back to it later in life. I think the notion of talents lying below the surface is one that resonates with many people.

Heidi comes after a string of remarkable season #4 guests. John Yorke is a student of story. Harold Lopez-Nussa is a master of rhythm and improvisation. Jim Himes is trying to get the US Congress to do what it is supposed to do. Yuhua Wang offers unique insight into China’s dynastic tradition. Amy Butcher and Jay Newman are both writers, one produced the memoir Mothertrucker, the other a thriller, Undermoney. Neuroscientist David Linden had the extreme generosity to share his perspective on both neuroscience and his own mortality. And finally my wife, Marina, spoke on Ukraine and therapy.

We will take a break over the summer as we record new episodes for the fall. If you have suggestions for someone who you think would be great on the show, reach out at paul@paulpodolsky.com. Thanks, as always, for your support!

1
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/05/24/remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-school-shooting-in-uvalde-texas/

2
https://apnews.com/article/nra-bankruptcy-dismissed-a281b888b64d391374f24539a820d60f

3
https://americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/PPP-GunOwnersPollResults-11.17.15.pdf?_ga=2.22803515.1057824656.1653574232-1107523109.1653574232

4
https://www.rand.org/research/gun-policy/analysis/essays/1996-national-firearms-agreement.html

The Cacophony Economy

A business has three moving parts—content, distribution and financing. Since the advent of modern capitalism about 250 years ago, there have been a series of battles over who controls distribution. Today, this fight centers on information. What’s referred to as the “creator economy” is in fact a cacophony economy. Anyone can post anything, thus the cacophony. What we see, however, is a function of algos that feed off emotions like anger and lust or something quite old-school, ad spend.

Old Industrial Corridors

Before the Industrial Revolution. living standards were not that much different than they had been in the Roman Empire. The first meaningful shift in distribution was the creation of canals. Roads made of water transported wheat and coal from where they were produced to where people needed them, leading the cost of coal and wheat to plummet and the fortunes of both those who owned the canals and initial investors to soar.1

Capitalism is an instability machine. Technology evolves, creating vulnerabilities in old systems. Railroads and train tracks obliterated the canal business. The trains carried similar things but they had structural advantages—like not freezing in the winter—and were faster. Canals and their stock holders got crushed, and families like the Vanderbilts, the Goulds and the Harrimans became wildly wealthy. Their mansions outlive them and are now museums in coastal Rhode Island.

Cars and airplanes disrupted trains. Over a few centuries, new inventions didn’t eliminate the old ones, they grew on top of them. Part of the war in Ukraine is a fight over old fashioned pipes carrying natural gas or ports exporting wheat. The question is always who gets control and the price for access, which is a function of the relative power of those who offer content, distribution and finance.

New Industrial Corridors

Today’s information distribution is radically different from the previous. When I grew up in 1970s Washington, there were three meaningful information pipes—books, TV and newspaper. In my hometown., the top companies in these spaces were Farrar Strauss and Giroux (books), CBS News and The Washington Post.

These companies were both profitable and influential. When Russian dissident Alexander Solzhenitsyn published books via Farrar Strauss it was disruptive enough that he was thrown out of the Soviet Union and perhaps played a small role in his country’s collapse. When Walter Cronkite voiced skepticism over the Vietnam War, he helped end it. When The Post’s Woodard and Bernstein went after President Nixon, he resigned.

Ownership was concentrated, content highly curated (lots of gatekeepers) and distribution a patchwork. Owners like Robert Strauss, William Paley (CBS) and Katherine Graham (Washington Post) were not as wealthy as the Vanderbilts (hundreds of millions versus billions), but they were more influential. To get a book published, for instance, a writer needed to attract an agent, who then struck a deal with a publisher, which distributed through independent book stores, like Kramer’s in D.C. or The Strand in New York. The Post controlled Washington, but had almost no distribution beyond.

The revenue model of CBS and The Post was largely driven by advertising. Farrar Strauss had monopoly control over cultural icons and charged a premium for access. The publisher had more power than the distributor. The distribution networks were funded by equity and debt but the PE, or price paid for the earnings, for these media stocks was never that high because the potential distribution was structurally limited. The Post, for instance, was not selling in Texas.

New Industrial Information Pipes

The internet created a new pipe, doing to the old model what railroads did to canals. It has happened fast. The internet simultaneously created unprecedented scale, no gate keepers, and a rapid shift in cash flows that favors distributors relative to those that provide content or finance. Armies of people—book agents, advertising salespeople, copy editors, reporters—saw their cash flows decline, while others—software engineers, computer scientists, venture capitalists and above all entrepreneurs—saw theirs soar.

Jeff Bezos (Amazon), Reed Hastings (Netflix) and Jack Dorsey (Twitter) either understood what was going on faster than others or were lucky or both. They are the modern-day Vanderbilts, billionaires all, with Bezos the second richest man in the world. They wield more power than Katherine Graham, William Paley and Roger Strauss combined but outsource content judgement to algorithms that, to date, favor anger and lust more than logic or people who pay for placement.

Amazon is an interesting case study because their control of distribution channels, like books, is so dominant. Bezos financed unprecedented scale via stock investors willing to pay a very high price (the PE) for the promise of future profits, similar to the ardor once elicited by canals and railroads. Bezos uses distribution to control suppliers by forcing them to sell at lower prices than they did in the past. This eviscerates legacy business models, offers consumers lower prices, and, because consumers like low prices, helps insulate Amazon from regulatory action.



The book above is from the 1970s. The inflation adjusted price today would be $70. The Kindle gained traction around 2010. Today, Amazon carry tens of millions of books, making the local book store look as dated as a typewriter and driving down prices closer to $10.

“For the big book publishers, Amazon’s dawning monopoly in e-books was terrifying. As suppliers had learned … no matter the category, Amazon wield its market power neither lightly or gracefully, employing every bit of leverage to improve its margins…,” wrote Brad Stone in The Everything Store.

By 2013, two of the most storied publishers, Penguin and Random House, merged. If the Justice Department allows it, a proposed merger of Simon and Schuster and Random House, traditionally published books will come from just four companies: Bertelesman, News Corp, Lagarderie Group and Holtzbrick. Weak profits forced consolidation (a more detailed table is Subscriber-only).

The internet wreaked similar havoc in traditional newspapers and TV by crushing ad revenue. About 30% of US newspapers have died, some of them well over 100 years old.2 The young barely watch TV (as the Rose chart below shows).3 More people follow Justin Bieber (114 million Twitter followers) than watch Anderson Cooper (about 500k viewers).4 Trump understood this very well.



Going Forward

Going forward, I suspect tightening financial conditions

will further pressure the stock of the big interent companies, which will force them to become more aggressive in trying to boost cash flow via algos and advertising. This means the cacophony remains but the ability to set the rules around who is heard tilts further toward those with money, impacting both “creators” and our politics.

Regarding financial conditions, for the first time since they were created, the disrupters face tight money. Amazon was created in 1994, Netflix was created in 1997, Twitter in 2006. Given high inflation, the central bank needs to raise rates a lot, which is terrible for high priced stocks. This isn’t new by the way. When the Crimean War (1853) drove food prices higher, this led to tighter liquidity and railroad stocks got crushed.

Each company has different vulnerabilities and tactics. Amazon made $24 billion last year, but its margin excluding web services (AWS) is only 3%. Retail is a tough business. Yet, Amazon’s PE is almost 70 while Wall Mart is 20. Netflix makes less money, $5 billion, but has a 16% margin and a PE of 18 (versus Paramount at 13) and now faces increasing competition from Amazon among others. Twitter lost money last year and the PE is sky high, 170, and has not figured out how to scale. NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE.

Regarding the “creator economy,” Changes like driverless cars may well lead to more demand for content. How to fill the time when the commute no longer involves staring at the road? But the content will be beholden to distributors who, I suspect, will increasingly use algos to dictate story. The gate keepers shift to machines. Alternatively, you can pay Amazon, Twitter and soon Netflix to place your content. This means that if you pay enough ad spend to Twitter your view is heard. If you throw enough advertising dollars on Amazon, your book gets read. Soon Netflix will start accepting advertisements.5

Regarding politics, the above dynamic is what creates a post-Truth world. Good content faces the same struggle it always has. Proust published Remembrance of Things Past (considered by some to be the best book of the 20th century) on his own dime because publishers weren’t compelled. The Wire was not initially a hit and likely would not be green lighted today. If you look at the major book publishers, Bertelesman and Hotlzbrinck are privately held, insulating them from market pressures. (The below table is rough, but gives a picture of how lean the business is).



In the very short, term, I think there will continue to be a significant tightening of liqidity that will hurt many assets. This is the portfolio I’m running. I’m up 0.6% this year (unaudited). Likely big adjustments to business models will only come if markets take another leg down. Again, not investment advice. Write with questions.



1
Nairn, Engines that Move.

2
Vanishing Newspapers



3
https://www.statista.com/chart/15224/daily-tv-consumption-by-us-adults/. https://www.capitalgroup.com/advisor/insights/articles/5-predictions-future-media.html

4
https://www.forbes.com/sites/markjoyella/2022/02/21/cnns-ratings-collapse-prime-time-down-nearly-70-in-key-demo/?sh=3d68be186dda

5

Oz, Tornados and Limits

If you are new, welcome! The idea behind these posts is to connect big picture macro and little picture micro. Macro is history, technology and the economy. Micro is emotion and personal journey. I’m trying to integrate often siloed worlds. My first book, Raising a Thief, and podcast on Apple Podcasts and Spotify are micro. These posts are macro but it is all one thing—making sense of what is going on around us. Most of this content is free. It takes a team to build this and I thank all my paid subscribers for your support. Enjoy.

Modern life offers both unprecedented comfort and complexity. Humans haven’t changed but our world has. We can only hold so much in our heads and are prone to bouts of optimism and despair. The combination of our mental limits and the world’s increasing complexity makes understanding harder.

When it comes to money, some readers tell me it is now too painful to look. Why exactly is wealth disappearing? Inflation is over 8% and the stock market down 18%. Stocks, bonds and confidence are falling because the real interest rate (shown below), has risen from -1% to a bit above zero. Yet, outside of bond traders, no one knows what a real interest rate is, why it matters and how it works. But the real interest rate is nothing new.



I know bonds bore most people as much as good drama intrigues them. To circumnavigate our resistance to the abstract, parables tap into our predilection for story. The most famous money parable in the US is The Wizard of Oz, the Bridgerton of 1900. To refresh your memory, Dorothy is swept up in a tornado and finds herself on a yellow brick road with a scarecrow, tin man and lion battling a terrifying witch, all while searching for the Wizard.

How much the symbolism was intended isn’t clear, but it doesn’t take much of a leap to create it. Dorothy = midwestern goodness, yellow brick = gold, scarecrow = farmer, tin man = industrialist, Oz = ounce. The wizard is the person who decides how much money to print.

Past Symbolism Echoes Today’s Politics

When The Wizard of Oz came out, about 40% of the US population were farmers. There was no Federal Reserve. It was created in 1913. Now 1% of the population are farmers and the big money is in technology and finance, not agriculture and industry. We still struggle with deciding how much money to print, however.

The Wizard of Oz’s publication followed a Presidential race where the big issue was whether the US should remain on the gold standard or switch to a gold/silver or “bi-metallic” standard. Back then, people believed a dollar of currency should be backed by something tangible as opposed to a loose promise from the “Emerald City.” Gold couldn’t be printed, was rare and durable. This meant the money supply expanded and contracted not due to human judgement, but by how much gold was discovered. California gold rush meant money supply expanded.

Bi-metal meant more money (backed by gold and silver), so more printing. In 1896, the Democrats wanted more printing, the Republicans wanted less. McKinley, the Republican candidate, won and the US stayed on the gold standard. Today a technocrat, Powell, is supposed to decide how much to print even though a politician, Biden, will be blamed for inflation because, like I said, no one knows what a real interest rate is.

Winners and Losers

The real interest rate is the cost of money. If you print more, the rate falls. If you print less, the rate rises. The real interest rate drives nominal interest rates, mortgage and corporate borrowing rates and PEs, the price one pays for stocks. In other words, it drives everything. This is why financial people pay more attention to the central bank than Congress.

If you print too much, you get inflation. If you print too little, a depression. Neither is desirable and in either scenario there are winners and losers. The challenge is adjusting policy such that the wins and losses are tolerable. When inflation spins out of control, like in Weimar Germany, it leads to huge shifts in wealth and political instability. Today’s 8% inflation qualifies as out-of-control, though I suspect it will begin to come down.

Traditionally, higher inflation favors debtors, because the real (inflation adjusted) cost of debt falls, and hurts lenders, who are getting paid back in now increasingly less valuable money. Deflation is the opposite. If the economy is collapsing and you are collecting 5%, 6% or 7%, your ability to buy improves.

In the The Wizard of Oz, the agricultural and industrial interests—the scarecrow and the tin man—are dependent on credit and would benefit from easier policy. The wicked witch of the east, perhaps a stand-in for banking interests, not so much. Today, the winners and losers are different. The winners are commodity producers and the losers are tech and the consumer.

Tech’s Free Money

Dorothy is swept up in a tornado. We were swept up in a pandemic. When the pandemic struck, demand collapsed and so did inflation. So the Fed printed a lot of money to replace the spending consumers were no longer doing. With bonds yielding nothing, money poured into stocks, driving up the price of tech stocks in particular, as shown below. If tech stocks revert to pre-pandemic levels, they will decline another 20%.



This pop in tech stocks was the final stage of what has been a protracted shift. Years of low inflation created a self-reinforcing loop. Companies with novel if unprofitable ideas could fund themselves by selling stocks to willing investors.

Companies like Uber or Twitter became familiar to many even though they didn’t actually make money. Investors were excited because these companies, theoretically, offered enormous economies of scale. As opposed to owning a taxi company in New York City, you could own technology that drove taxis all over the world, without paying for the taxi. But the secret to this magic trick was persistently falling real interest rates, the force behind the force, which created an insatiable appetite for stocks.

As I wrote last week, while consumers initially benefited, producers and traditional gate keepers (like fact checkers) get hurt. I estimate Amazon has caused a roughly 70% deflation in book prices and there is clearly some more difficult to quantify pass through to our civic culture. Senate Bill 2992, the America Innovation and Choice Online Act tries to tip the balance away from distributors like Amazon toward producers, possibly hurting consumers.

Disruption is how capitalism works. But disruption is different than a bubble. The collapse in real interest rates inadvertently further boosted the prospects of already powerful tech giants and simultaneously helped create so much inflation that consumers are now solidly on the losing end. Now the unwind is underway.

Bond Traders Versus Tech Investors

Tech investors and bond traders think differently. Palo Alto likes novel visions of the future. Much of this turns out to be bunk, a small portion miraculous. For instance, companies have been trying to figure out how to have a computer replace a secretary in a way that doesn’t make a caller homicidal for at least thirty years and have so far failed to succeed.

To be sure, it is true that the computer I am writing this on is powered by insanely fast chips allowing me to pull in information from all over the world and video chat, for free, anyone I wish. That’s something and these innovations are fueled by the stock market. Ditto mRNA vaccines.

Bond traders see the world in terms of limits. The economy can only grow so fast, oscillating between a few percentage points positive to a few percentage points negative. This speed limit is determined by a) population growth and b) productivity, how inventive we are.

Real interest rates are tied to this speed limit on growth. The real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus inflation. Typically, the real interest rate can only get so high, when money is tight, or so low, when money is easy. During the pandemic, things got out of balance, real interest rates plummeted. Could the Fed now lose credibility? Yes. In bond trader parlance the “tails” become more likely in this dynamic, which is to say low probability events become more probable.

Commodities and Strangling the US Economy

Inflation is the average price of a pile of stuff. Some of that is tied to the US, like the cost of hiring a person, but some of it is not, like oil and the price of imports, many of which come from China. Putin invading Ukraine disrupted both wheat and oil, leading to an explosion in prices which will now create an enormous pay day for those who can produce or transport what Russia no longer can.

Similarly, Xi’s zero Covid policy is continuing to snarl ship traffic, leading to goods inflation, as the Rose chart below shows. Some of my Shanghai readers will, as I understand it, be submitting to another round of mandatory testing Saturday. Note how all prices are up but goods (from China) and energy lead the way.



The Fed needs to stop the inflation and it only has blunt tools to do it, interest rates. It can not influence Putin or Xi. What it can do is strangle the US economy.

How much do they need to strangle the US economy? The US economy can run, without inflation at about 2% growth a year, 1% due to population growth and 1% due to productivity improvements (what the tech is supposed to provide). That means the economy needs to run below 2% to get inflation to ease, maybe a lot below given that food and energy price shocks are coming from abroad. I suspect the US economy is already slowing quite a bit.

Investment Implications

At the end of Oz, they finally meet the Wizard. He turns out to be a guy just like everyone else, struggling to make sense of things and pull the right levers. We all are.

It’s tempting to think our present time is somehow unusual. There is a pandemic, a war and an acute ideological struggle both within countries and between them. Granted it is more complex but problems are more the norm than the exception, in part due to our small brains. Think about where the world was in 1900 when The Wizard of Oz came out. Ahead of it were two world wars, a Depression, a pandemic and nuclear war. My grandfather was born in 1902 and I remember him vividly. That wasn’t ancient history, it was his life.

In terms of my portfolio, I have the same bets on, but they have become a bit bigger. I am short US stocks, short US bonds, long companies who own different forms of tolls on transporting commodities like natural gas and oil. Some of these companies are getting hurt, but they have safe cash flow. I’m trying to both trade falling asset prices and collect some dividends. The portfolio and my past results are below. NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE…INVESTING INVOLVES RISK OF LOSS.





A question: would subscribers like an opportunity to ask me anything? I know when I talk to subscribers in person, there are lots of questions I get. If it’s helpful, email me and I’ll organize a zoom. Paul@paulpodolsky.com

The Dictatorship of Reality

Note to readers: in addition to these posts and the podcast, I write books. Just before I publish a new book, I test it with beta readers. If you are interested in being one, give me a shout. The first book, Raising a Thief, was non-fiction. Book #2 is fiction.

Watching stocks sink and Xi support Putin’s war isn’t easy. But, if you value your autonomy, it’s better to watch and be alert to how they are connected. That’s true even if the money world bores you. Reality is a dictatorship.

The English writer Virginia Woolf said to write one needed a “room of one’s own.” “One’s own” has a literal meaning for a writer and a conceptual one for everyone else. It means having the money and autonomy to pursue your curiosity, whatever that may be. Because money is constantly unstable, we either pay attention or pay the price. High inflation is forcing the central bank to stop printing money, driving assets down. If Xi follows Putin’s lead, which seems increasingly likely, beyond the world becoming more scary, the inflation forcing the central banks to act will get worse. Rising inflation, falling growth and external challenges in turn increase the risk that open societies elect a dictator. As the Jan. 6 hearings show, the US already did.

Summary:

In response to surging inflation, central banks are rapidly pulling back on printing money, driving down all assets.

Inflation is exacerbated by war in Ukraine and climate change related drought, which together drive up energy and food prices. Because this is outside the control of central banks, they need to tighten even more.

China is indicating it intends to forcibly absorb Taiwan, though only Xi knows for sure. If this happened soon, it would significantly prolong current turmoil, including inflation.

In open societies, the combination of high inflation, weak growth/income disparity and external threats weaken confidence in rule-of-law systems, increasing the risk a dictator gains power.

Tightening and Wealth

Less money printing equals lower asset prices. It is that simple. As of this writing, the US stock market, in real, inflation adjusted terms, is off by almost 1/3 this year. Global stocks are all negative. Sooner or later, this hits you or people close to you via a lost job or diminished savings. If we all desire a “room of one’s own,” a contraction in asset prices makes achieving this more distant.

In markets, by the time something is obvious, it’s already at least part way over. Stage one in the stock market decline is the price one pay’s for a unit of earnings, or the PE ratio, falling. It’s gone from the low 20s to around 16, which is closer to average, as my previous posts have illustrated. Stage two is the earnings declining. If the stock market is tanking and the central bank is raising rates, earnings will soon get hit. I expect this will drive the stock market down yet further (NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE).

Of course, different sectors respond at different rates. Remember FAANG (Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix, Google)? This was like the Nifty Fifty years before. Below is a chart of Apple, which Warren Buffet has a large position in and has only recently started to slide. Apple makes great products and it’s an expensive stock. Despite all the turmoil, the PE is around 20…it’s been as low as 10 in the not so distant past, meaning some stocks may see both falling PEs and earnings.



The Fed will start printing again when the economy rolls over, not before. The tech companies are already starting to fire people and soon this will show up in the employment numbers and the entire economy. But until inflation falls enough that the central bank can stop raising rates, the stock market will struggle. The chart below that Rose Technology created takes the average of every major stock market decline since 1957. The market never hits bottom until the Fed stops hiking and there is no risk of that happening soon.



Conflict and Inflation

Russia is trading its wealth for territory. Before it invaded Crimea in 2014, Russia had a growing economy, a near lock hold on many commodity exports (not just oil and natural gas but metals like palladium and aluminum) and an increasingly wealthy population. What cold go wrong?

The best news source for Russia, beyond looking at the economic data, are the documentaries from Alexei Navalny’s Anti-Corruption organization. They show how Russia actually works, which is why Navalny is in jail. The most recent documentary was released Thursday. It details obscene corruption at the natural gas giant Gazprom. The difference between oil rich Norway ($66k per capita) and oil rich Russia ($27k per capita) is graft. The 20-year return on Gazprom, the biggest natural gas producer in the world is….zero. (See my Twitter for chart).

Now the West is trying to replace Russian oil and gas even as Russia counterattacks and cuts them off. Not surprisingly, gas prices have tripled. This is inflationary and makes the Fed’s job much harder.



China is commodities poor but production rich. This week, Xi defended Putin’s war (noting the “legitimacy” of Russia’s attack), unveiled a third aircraft carrier and China watchers like Bill Bishop highlighted a statement from the Cyberspace Administration citing the wisdom of Mao. Each week brings something like this. China invaded Vietnam in 1979 and if it does the same with Taiwan, the disruption in current supply chains will seem tiny. Inflation will shoot higher as the West, Japan and Australia level sanctions on China. Where will Apple make its phones?

A final inflation image that deserves a separate post. High temperatures driven by global warming are creating drought and driving agriculture prices (food) higher. This is on top of the interruption in wheat exports from Ukraine. All this means the central bank may need to step on the brakes even harder, depending on the timing of all these disruptions.



Political Cost of Policy Errors and Dictator Risk

What brought us to this? It’s complicated. One vector is a string of policy errors. Some major flubs:

The Fed. The Fed messed up by not removing pandemic-related liquidity more quickly. This is the second big goof up this century, 2008 being the last. The major screw ups they’ve made before are 1929 and the 1970s.

Believing that the West could work with Putin and Xi. The big assumption in the West, including with me, was that as these countries became more commercial, they would be more peaceful. That’s clearly not true.

Climate change. A collective failure to move faster.

The FCC. This relates to a previous post, The Cacophony Economy. The 1934 Communications Act stipulated that radio and TV was in part a public good. The internet is immune from such rules, which is part of what has created a post-truth world.

I wonder if part of these errors isn’t a talent challenge. I’m told that the staffing has deteriorated at places like the Fed. An analyst at the New York Fed makes about $75k. A typical software engineer fresh out of school makes around $200k. Those people I know at the Fed are good souls and I wonder if government is drawing the requisite talent. My fear is high inflation, a sliding economy and external threats leave open societies vulnerable to dictators. The January 6 hearings show the US already had one who, miraculously, didn’t pull off what he wanted. Bad policy creates bad outcomes creates a lack of confidence in the system itself.

What Happens Next – Investment Implications


Read more

Timing A Turn

Money can make us a bit crazy. Poverty is terribly constraining in ways big and small. Most people, statistically the middle, feel they don’t have enough money.1 The super wealthy liberate themselves from those concerns but sometimes lose something in the process, like shared experiences, be they supermarkets or airport security and, as a result, risk becoming detached from reality. There is no easy solution.

Chekhov has a character declare the following in Gooseberries.

Money, like vodka, can do queer things to a man … One day when I was inspecting a drove of cattle at the railway station, a cattle dealer fell under a locomotive and it sliced off his leg. We carried him in to the infirmary, the blood was gushing from the wound—a terrible business, but he kept begging us to find the leg and was very anxious about it; he had twenty rubles in the boot that was on that leg, and was afraid they would be lost.

There is a bit of the cattle dealer in many of us, at least in me. The anxiety comes from the fact that we desire stability but money refuses to cooperate, constantly changing shape. A stock or a bond or a house is priced based on what will happen ten years in the future. In the effort to figure out what is going on, it is easy to mistake the big for the small and vice versa.

This uncertain future is in flux while human nature is not. Chekhov’s stories resonate even though the world he wrote about is all but extinguished. He wrote Gooseberries while dying from tuberculosis. Antibiotics, invented twenty-four years after his death, largely eliminated that disease. In his life, Russian stocks kept pace with US ones. Not long after he died, the Russian stock market closed followed by the 1917 Revolution and, later, Stalin’s bloodletting.

Despite thousands of years of experimentation, we have yet to figure out a system of governance or economic management that reliably produces better than least worst outcomes. You don’t need to look far. The US nearly succumbed to a coup, the central bank has lurched from the gas to brakes, inflation is high and climate-change triggered drought grips the land.2

Recent Past

The past two years illustrate the challenge of getting the money part right, which should be simpler than getting the political part right. The money printing is abstract, the central bank creating zeros on a computer. We notice the consequences of the printing (inflation) more than the printing itself. That said, the chart below of what’s known as the Fed’s balance sheet shows the massive expansion and recent contraction in printing.



These money shifts impact our lives. Going into the pandemic, in the US if you had $100 in the stock market, it quickly dropped to $64. Beyond feeling like you might die, you also felt suddenly less financially secure, the anxious cattle dealer. Why did the stock market stop dropping? Because the central bank printed and, depending on the country you live in, emergency aid was authorized, some of which also ended up in the stock market.

The $64 jumped to about $150 by early this year, as you see below. The risk of dying from Covid retreated and, on top of it, you were wealthier than when this whole saga began. Bonus!



Now we know that much of that rally was based on fluff, stocks with nice ideas and no earnings. Then external forces shifted unexpectedly. Russia invaded Ukraine, Xi locked down China and, in combination with the money printing, inflation shot higher. Now central banks are rapidly reducing their printing and once again the markets are topsy turvy. The $150 you had at the start of this year is worth just $120.

Timing a Turn

One hypothetical solution is to ignore these oscillations. If the world stopped right now, you are $20 better off for having sat still. But the world never stops. Stocks for the long run works really well…in America. In countries like Russia and most of the rest of the world, it hasn’t worked. Sometimes you need to bail completely, which is why political perturbations don’t matter that much for savers but revolutions do. In that sense, the cattle driver is right to be anxious.

Tracking the Jan. 6 hearings, a significant portion of the US is angry enough to toss rule-of-law out the window. And it isn’t only in the US. There are the elections in France. I learned in a discussion this week that roughly 40% of the Hong Kong judiciary/law enforcment supports Chinese rules that abandon Hong Kong’s rule-of-law.

Inflation matters not just for markets but also for confidence in the political system. I can’t talk about what is going on without getting a bit geeky. Inflation is a rate of change concept. That means if the price change of the things we measure stays high, $5 gas, but is unchanged (still $5 gas), the rate of inflation falls to zero. Poof, inflation concerns disappear. It’s sort of like sprinting, the faster you go the harder it is to go yet faster. So to guess if inflation will turn down you need to look at what the rate of change is at the components of the economy.
