Things Fall Apart
It’s easy to be lulled into a sense that lessons once painfully learned, sometimes over hundreds of years—like the value of stable borders or rules limiting a leader’s power—are now accepted wisdom. I spent part of last week in Turkish-controlled Cyprus, a place that serves as a reminder of what happens when this wisdom is lost.
Cyprus, perched north of Egypt and west of Lebanon, is divided. It’s warm here now. Just past the UN monitored Green Line, I entered Turkish-controlled territory. The fields went from green to brown, the houses from painted to unpainted, the cats from silken to scrawny.  
“Cats aren’t dumb. It’s an island. They can choose where to live,” said my wife, once we were back in the south. “Here,” she said, referring to south Cyprus, “people lay out piles of nutritionally balanced cat food. Of course the cats look better.”
Dispute Resolution
At night, north Cyprus is dark and felt dangerous. Some places give off that vibe. Many buildings are empty. Initially, I wondered if I was imagining danger that wasn’t there. I later found out that as we finished dinner, a few towns over from us assassins emptied over 40 rounds into reputed drug lord Halil Falyali.
Violence is the same tool Turkey utilized to claim north Cyprus in 1974. Today Turkey is the one country that recognizes the “TRNC,” or the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which as a result is cut off from most investment. There is no Starbucks or Apple. Technically, north Cyprus is independent. Yet, the military, language and money are Turkish.
Erdogan, Turkey’s leader, is an opportunistic chameleon. He came to power in 2003. Early in his career, he supported long-standing EU efforts at reunification1; of late, the opposite.
Turkey was once held up as a post-9/11 example of a Muslim-majority democracy. Instead, Erdogan has systematically destroyed institutions cherished by Turkey’s urban, educated elite. Of all the disruptive things Erdogan has done—renditions abroad, bringing religion back into civic life, adjusting rules to prolong his reign—the one that has hurt ordinary Turks and north Cypriots the most is destroying the currency.
Inflation
“Good for you, but bad for me,” said a baker, as I bought a halloumi bun from him, referring to the exchange rate. He smelled of cigarettes. His eyes looked sad.
The cost of a fancy hotel room in Greek Cyprus is hundreds of dollars; in north Cyprus it was $57. Turkey’s inflation is about 50%. Erdogan believes printing more money (lowering interest rates) will reduce inflation, which is like using hydroxychloroquine against Covid. Among his edicts, he has fired central bank technocrats.
Like a virus, inflation touches everybody. The stores in north Cyprus had plenty of basic goods, but not many buyers, except for Greek Cypriots who cross the border to take advantage of the exchange rate. As the chart from Rose Technology shows, Turks who saved in lira have been wiped out.

Places like northern Cyprus are an argument for crypto. In a country with a relatively stable currency, like the dollar or euro or yuan, crypto’s main attraction seems to be doing illegal stuff, like computer hacking. Once a populist dictator willing to end central bank autonomy takes over, risks shift.
Rule of Law
At a restaurant edged out over crashing Mediterranean waves, air dried, eviscerated fish hung from the ceiling.

There was no Covid protocol. The waiter didn’t wear a mask. No one checked our vaccine status. Around us, young men in tight-fitting black jeans smoked. I opened a window and the waiter closed it. On the southern, Greek-majority side, Covid protocol was tighter than home in Connecticut. I needed to show I was vaccinated to get inside a grocery store.
The main industry in north Cyprus seems to be casinos and attracting price-sensitive tourists. I suspect the deed on many new projects is open to question. It is, however, an ideal location for money laundering, likely for people like Mr. Falyali.
Modern Turkey was founded on the notion that the path to wealth and stability was to wrest the country away from its parochial, religious dominated past and move to a more rules-based order. The venerated founder, Ataturk, was perhaps a bit like Russia’s Peter the Great, though I am no a Turkey specialist. But it seems rural tradition doesn’t easily yield to modernity.
A map of support for Erdogan, Putin or Trump looks similar. The countryside likes populists, city-folk don’t. Following a failed 2016 coup to topple Erdogan, the ensuing crackdown is undermining rule of law. Erdogan is supposed to step down in 2023. Modern Turkey was founded in 1923. Will the current form of government last even 100 years?
Negative Loop
That a place as dysfunctional as Turkey matters to Washington, Brussels and Moscow is a function of geography and religion. Turkey’s 80 million population straddles Asia and Europe and the straights of Bosporus. The country is a member of NATO but not the European Union, buys offensive weapons from the US, defensive weapons from Russia and sells drones to Ukraine.  During the Syrian War, Erdogan attacked Kurds, who are both US allies and don’t want to be part of either Syria or Turkey. Yet, US support continues.
Keeping a finger in north Cyprus gives Turkey a claim on possible natural gas deposits. Are there other motivations at work? A former Turkish mafia boss, Sedat Peker, moved to the Emirates and shares videos accusing Erdogan and his clique of widespread corruption, including Mr. Falyali.
Not surprisingly, those who can leave Turkey do, creating a brain drain.2 Inflows into Turkey are related to refugees fleeing places even worse.

Turkey may be strategically positioned, but it is economically and politically weak, another example of a bad emerging market investment. Given a global boom in energy, competitive manufacturing and tech, Turkey has little to offer but labor that, given the exchange rate, is quite cheap. Turkish-controlled Cyprus is an example of what life looks like when things fall apart. I always like seeing such places first hand and it is one of those regions where, upon leaving, I breathed a sigh of relief and, at that exact moment, felt a wave of sympathy for those who remain.
Market Update, Subscribers Only
US stocks have lost about 7% this year. Inflation is 7%. Money is disappearing fast, but this is not that surprising if you think about the mechanics of what is going on.
The high inflation will force the Fed (central bank) to raise rates a lot. At this point, their credibility is on the line. As interest rates go higher, stocks and other risky assets generally go lower. I don’t think the Fed will let up until the data shows inflation falling close to 2%. Given that a lot of the inflation is being caused by a supply chains mess that the Fed can’t control, they only thing they can do is crush US demand.
Then there is Russia risk. Russian and US assets began trading Friday afternoon as if an invasion was imminent. I repeat what I’ve said before: the only person who knows is Putin and he may not yet have decided. Subscribers have asked me to guess what happens next. Here is my guess: Putin will do something disruptive but short of all-out war. Stalin murdered millions; Putin uses targeted assassinations. Similar impact, fear, but lower costs. I imagine he will apply that template, somehow, to Ukraine.
What should a saver do?
As usual, this is said with the caveat that THIS IS NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE, I am telling you what I am doing for you to take or leave.
1. 	My starting point is strategic asset allocation that is roughly 1/3 stocks, 1/3 bonds and 1/3 long inflation-hedging real estate like assets.
2. 	I have made tactical shifts relative to this including:
a. 	Reduced equities to roughly 25%, mostly achieved through owning individual stocks that benefit from a more inflationary environment, like banks and shipping stocks.
b. 	4% short the S&P 500 outright.
c. 	Roughly 60% short US bonds. I have moved my short from short-term bonds,(described in December) to the 10-year part of the curve.
d. 	Overweight commodities and commodity producers.
3. 	As of Friday’s close, my portfolio was up about about 0.70% this year (NOT AUDITED), so these hedges are helping but clearly they are not big enough…something I need to do better. Sometimes just staying flat is an accomplishment.
1
There was a failed refrendum on unification in 2004. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Annan_Plan
2
https://ahvalnews.com/turkish-brain-drain/look-turkeys-brain-drain

My Geography Lesson

We grow mostly by word of mouth and a bigger community creates more robust dialogue, so feel free to forward widely!

Today, I am sharing a podcast with an amazing Cuban musician, Harold Lopez-Nussa, which you can hear here. As I re-listened to our talk while tracking Ukraine events and digesting a rich conversation at a Nicosia coffee bar, I kept coming back to the same old but important idea: don’t forget geography.
By geography, I mean physical boundaries, or lack thereof, such as the claustrophobic, impoverished streets of Havana, where Harold grew up, the surrounded-by-belligerent-neighbors Ukraine or the often-overrun Cyprus. Because America is blessed with a relatively open government and favorable geography, it’s a lesson that’s easy for me and perhaps many others to forget.   
Cuba
Harold is very gifted. I am grateful he made time for our chat. Perhaps he would have accomplished the same virtuoso if he had been raised in Cleveland.  But I doubt it.
In our conversation, he described a very particular upbringing. He was born into a family of musicians in a country that both worships music and where music, like baseball, is a way out.  An impoverished island creates an incentive that does not exist in nearly the same degree in Cleveland.
There was a time under Obama when it was possible to fly from La Guardia to Havana. My wife, son and I took the trip. The poverty was glaring—hanging wires in the street, crumbling houses, food lines, hunger. Despite being in the middle of an ocean, locals could not easily buy fish because the government lacked refrigerated trucks to get the catch from docks to stores. Every night we heard a different band. You listen to music differently in such a place. Evidently you play it differently, too.
Geography influenced Cuba in one more way. Because it was both socialist and close to the US, the Soviet Union embraced Cuba. In Russia, classical music training  is incredibly strong and some of that made its way down to Cuba. Harold studied in a conservatory with teachers who trained in Russia.
Ukraine
Geography is a potent force in the Ukraine crisis as well.
To be clear, the crisis is a Putin invention.  Given nukes, the US and Russia can threaten each other just fine with or without NATO. Putin views forcibly expanding borders as less a violation of international law and more a sign of strength.  This is medieval-era thinking.
But such thinking is likely tied to Russia’s geography. Russia is vast and corrupt, which makes it tough administer and defend. Flying over it makes the trip from New York to LA seem easy. Russia has been invaded three times (Hitler, Napoleon, Genghis Kahn) and faces unrest within its borders, in Chechnya. Its neighbors include North Korea, China and Azerbaijan versus, for the US, Canada and Mexico. The treasure in the ground­­––oil, natural gas, palladium, platinum and gold—pays for Russia’s guns.

Geographically, Ukraine is perched on a cultural fault line, part Eastern, part Western. Given that Ukraine is, like Russia, also easy to invade, it has been occupied and absorbed many times—by Germans, Poles, Russians and others­­­­. The recent resurgence of a strong national identify and clear Western tilt is both understandable and geopolitically disruptive. Ukraine’s natural resources—agriculture rather than oil—are less lucrative, which equals a weaker military.
Cyprus
I had the good fortune to meet with a thoughtful local at a Nicosia coffee shop.  I sipped a flat white and she indulgently answered my endless questions. She wore an overcoat in what counts as Cyprus winter, high 50s.
If the Mediterranean is the cradle of civilization, Cyprus is the pillow. There are 2500-year-old jugs in a museum that in form look a lot like a water jug in any modern kitchen. Today, Cyprus has just over 1 million people and falls directly into the path of whatever dominant power is trying to spread its influence across the Mediterranean­­––Greeks, Romans, Ottomans, Brits or the European Union.
 “It’s marked our psyche,” said my interlocuter. Her grandparents were sheep herders, she has a PhD, the benefits of hard work and living through an economic upswing.
Russian officialdom is plagued with what I’d describe as insecure, sometimes messianic nationalism. In Cyprus, one finds instead an almost excessive ideological flexibility—they are accustomed to bending to greater forces.  This was evident long ago—the language is Greek, not Cypriot­­—and evident today. About ten years ago, one great power, Russia, flooded local banks with money, which promptly bought a lot of Greek bonds that later collapsed in value, requiring another great power, the EU, to bail Cyprus out.
The Digital Overlaid Upon the Ancient
Technology is layered on top of these ancient geographic forces and the two interact in odd ways.  On Twitter, I watch Russian and Ukrainian soldiers hurl profanities, in English, at each other across the front line. We are superficially much more familiar with one another but lack context, like feeling the geography in our bones.
The digital revolution, now segueing into the artificial intelligence revolution, is happening so fast that a lot of activity is occurring that might seem, in retrospect, like a vast misallocation of resources.  For instance, hundreds of millions of people can stream Harold’s music on Spotify, but neither Harold nor Spotify make much money on this. Less than 1% of Spotify’s creators get paid, but that is enough to wipe out most of Spotify’s profits, as the great chart from Rose Technology shows below (as usual all these wonderful charts are from Rose!).

The far less sexy business of concert tickets, essentially buying geographic proximity, is both how Harold gets paid and what has allowed concert ticket-seller Live Nation to narrow the stock gap with Spotify. Markets are a useful window into what parts of this new world might persist.

So follow Harrold on social media and next time he comes to town, buy tickets. You won’t regret it.
Market Thoughts:
I’m watching the Ukraine situation the same as all of you. Putin seems more of an incrementalist than the type of guy that does a full-scale invasion, but it’s impossible to predict. I’m mostly positioned for stronger growth and tighter monetary policy. Obviously, if Putin launches a full-scale war, I expect to lose some money. Leading up to this, I had lowered my equity exposure, modestly increased my cash, sold all my Russia holdings and also don’t hold any European assets. In short, I’m also playing defense.
Ukraine Update

I am getting questions about Ukraine. Below, I share what I am seeing and doing. I am also offering an “ask me anything zoom session” about this topic later today, if it’s helpful, and tried to pick a time that works for Asia, Europe and the US. To be sure, it is hard to offer clarity given how fast things are moving and my views will evolve as the facts do.
Before diving in, for subscribers less familiar with me, a bit on where I am coming from. I started my career in Russia and lived there from 1991-1994. I’ve studied the economy and traded their markets and also met many of the policy-makers. I speak the language. I have a mother-in-law in Moscow; her sister lives in Ukraine. That doesn’t mean what I am saying is right, it’s just perspective.
Below is my summary.
Putin invaded Ukraine. The post-WW2 order was based on not forcibly changing borders. Putin is challenging that system. He did it before in Crimea, but by the time the West realized what was going on it was too late. Now he has done it again. I had thought Putin would continue negotiating. I was wrong. I now believe there will be a tragic, unnecessary possibly significant loss of life.
The West (US and Europe) face a choice. They can either confront a thug or not. They could confront Putin by sending in offensive weapons, pumping money and special forces advisors into Ukraine, though I am not a military strategist. If the US and EU don’t confront a thug, it is repeat of something between the 1930s and Yugoslavia in the 1990s. This then leads to a further crumbling of US influence and, more generally, rule-of-law. A weak response is akin to the US response to Syria when they used chemical weapons and the Afghanistan pull-out. A strong response is more akin to what happened when Iraq invaded Kuwait and 9/11.
If the US doesn’t confront Putin, he will take more territory. Putin sees the US as weak, doesn’t recognize Ukraine as a legitimate government, believes he has sanctioned-proofed his economy and that Germany is too dependent on Russian energy and too uncomfortable after its role in WW2 to put up much of a fight.
Putin is unhinged and armed, thus very dangerous. If poisoning and murdering enemies, arresting the opposition, invading Crimea and parts of Georgia were not enough to be concerned, listen to his speech yesterday. The YouTube link is here. I was shocked. This speech is divorced from reality.
Ukraine is dysfunctional, corrupt and the leader is not equipped to negotiate this well. To read much of the American press, Ukraine is the innocent lamb and Russia the wolf. It is more complicated. Ukraine is almost as corrupt as Russia and Zelensky has done little to combat it. If the US starts to pump more money and weapons over there, some of it, maybe a lot, will likely be stolen. This is not D-Day. The US faces least-worst choices.
China is absent. While conceptually Russia’s ally, China’s fundamental principle is non-interference in sovereign nations and Russia is clearly violating this.
In terms of investing, the big forces are:
The Ukraine crisis.
The Fed tightening. This will continue despite the invasion. Inflation is outside the Fed’s comfort zone and the Ukraine crisis will likely lead to higher energy prices and maybe even more Fed tightening.
The ebbing of Covid. This is a positive force and will lead to a continuing economic rebound, particularly in sectors, like travel that are in a depression.
Longer-term, the tech/AI revolution.
What I am doing with my money. THIS IS NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE, it is transparency.
Reducing risk. As the geopolitical risks widen, markets become more volatile, so I hold less of them. I don’t think geopolitical crises are predictable. I hold no Russian or European assets.
I lowered my stock exposure from about 24% to 19%. I hold mostly US banks, non-Russia emerging markets and stock pickers at this point.
I cut bond exposure from -40% short to zero. I had been short long-term US bonds. I am now flat long-term bonds, still short short-term (2-years and less) and long bonds in Australia and China.
Long commodities and commodity producers, roughly 20% long.
My logic: There is a chance we now get a strong NATO response to Russia at the same time the Fed is tightening. That’s bad for stocks and bonds. At the same time, inflation and the risk of interrupted Russia energy supplies might drive commodities higher.
Dial in details: 12 PM New York time, 7 PM my time in the Mediterranean. I’ll explain the above a bit more and answer questions if you have them. I’m sure a lot more will be clear even in the next 12 hours. Zoom ID: 883-3037-2427. Passcode: 479035. Please do not forward this email!
Ukraine Update #2

I am aghast at the videos of Ukrainians cowering in subways, clutching their children, just as the Russians did when the Nazis attacked them.1 The parallel is 1939, when Hitler invaded Poland, only this is also being live streamed on Telegram, Twitter and TikTok. And that bizarre parallel—barbarous invasion alongside free, disorganized, observation facilitated by private companies, technology and citizens—sum up the essence of the conflict. This is the medieval versus the modern.
The medieval is a king, myth, an army stealing land and murdering neighbors. Modernity is constituencies, disruptive change, compromise, rule of law, wealth, transparency and logic. What will win out? In the short-term, barbarity wins. In the long-term, modernity wins, I hope. But sometimes the period of barbarity can last a long time, like the 1000 years between the fall of Rome and the Enlightenment or the twelve years between Hitler’s rise to power and his death.
A Former Comedian Thrown into a Horror Film
Ukraine’s President, Zelensky, is a telegenic former comedian, sort of like former Senator Al Franken for US readers. He understands technology and uses it. He is quick on his feet and is displaying remarkable bravery. He has not, in the past, been particularly strong at implementation. He has no experience fighting a war. By contrast, Putin doesn’t use email and has a twisted world view that he is now openly sharing (listen to his speeches) rooted in settling feuds based on bizarre reads of history. He has experience orchestrating military conflict in a number of regions, like Syria, Donbas and Georgia. He is corrupt (think tithes) and has a history of pathological violence from the very beginning of his rule.2
I studied what are called “personality disorders” as part of my book research on Raising a Thief. While it’s a matter of degree, for many with personality disorders, truth and conscience have no meaning. This is why Putin lies repeatedly with such ease. Why people become like this varies; you have to train yourself to recognize everything Putin says is a lie or distortion. If such people are on the fringes of society, they inflict grievous harm in a limited way, like a serial killer. If they get power, psychopaths are much more dangerous. That’s what happened in Russia.
The parallel to 1930s Germany is haunting. Putin perceives himself as mighty and the Western system and leaders as weak. He can point to erratic leadership (Brexit, Trump), financial crises (2008), expensive, largely failed foreign policy (Iraq, Afghanistan) and internal division (Fox News commentators, the type of people Stalin called “useful idiots,” supporting him). Putin doesn’t regard Zelensky or the election he won as objective facts. Putin would not have invaded if he thought Biden was strong.
How Russia’s Economy Works
Whether or not Western allies can band together to stop Putin is the question. So far their actions seem weak and tentative, in part due to the structure of Russia’s economy, in part due to constraints and limited imagination. Whether the West is more Churchill (who vowed to fight fascist Germany) than Chamberlain (who appeased), matters a lot for where and how it will be safe to live going forward. It doesn’t take much of a leap to imagine Putin trying to take down the US power grid. How scared would you feel then?
An economy is spending and spending comes from two sources, income and borrowing. Russia’s income, the money for its military, is almost entirely tied to commodities—oil and natural gas—something Europe in particular can’t do without. To hurt Putin, the West would have to find a new source for energy in Europe or radically lower prices and neither can not be done quickly. Putin knows this.
The Russian economy is set up very differently than the US. The US has high debt and high dependence on foreign capital to fund high US consumption. This is why central bank rate hikes, which hurt capital markets, are such a powerful lever in the US.
Knowing such a structure would prove a vulnerability, Putin constrained Russian economic growth and capital markets (crushing innovation) and reduced dependence on the dollar. Sanctions that cut off borrowing will damage individual companies, like the Russian bank Sberbank, but won’t dislodge Putin. He clearly doesn’t care. The Russian currency never recovered from the Crimea invasion3 and the Russian stock market has declined over 40% this year and that has not dissuaded Putin one bit.
This is one reason why the US stock market has rallied after each set of announced sanctions. In a kind of bizarre logic, the market action reflects a belief that nothing significant will change, which is a problem. What the sanctions will do is turn Russia into an international pariah, like North Korea or Turkish-occupied Cyprus, but it will remain quite dangerous.
What More Painful Sanctions Might Look Like
To constrain Putin, the West will need to do big things, like what Reagan did to the Soviets, which was engineer much lower energy prices (through cutting deals with other producers), and boost defense spending. A person of Putin’s ilk only respects superior force. Doing so would upend Democratic priorities, like investing in the domestic economy, not doing business with other tyrants and green energy. It’s a set of tough choices.
The US could pressure Russia by working closely with oil-producers like Saudi Arabia’s MBS (who murdered the Saudi journalist Khashoogi) to boost energy supply and encourage US domestic energy production, like fracking, which is bad for the environment. The US would also need to make friends with major Russia oil customers like China. But approaching China means abandoning other priorities, like boycotting Olympics due to concern over human rights abuses. Europe would need to embrace nuclear energy, which Germany abandoned, and US-exported liquefied natural gas. This all seems a long, long way from where we are now. As my ex-boss said, you can have anything you want, but not everything you want.
There will also need to be an increase in military activity. NATO will need to boost troop levels in Poland and the Baltics, though I am not a military expert. Is there scope for cooperation between Turkey, a NATO member, on the Straights of Bosphorus in a way that would pressure Russia? In combination with military activity, one way or another, the West would need to use energy against Russia, rather than avoid touching energy due to fear over domestic reaction in the US and Europe, which is what is happening now.
What’s Next
Part of what happens next depends on if Ukraine fights and how successful the fighting is. I am monitoring feeds that shows resistance, but what is actually going on? It’s hard to know.
Ukraine is large, roughly the size of Texas, but with 10 million more people. Russia is aiming for a swift attack and perhaps (this is a guess) has dispatched secret police to round up leaders and take over local administration and detain Western-leaning administrators. The playbook would then be to arrest people who support Zelensky, which is what has happened in Belarus and Russia, and snuff out opposition. The longer Ukraine holds out, the more the West can help by funneling weapons and money to attack Russians.
The Russians, for their part, say they are trying to target the military as opposed to civilians. But war is war. I just watched film which purported to show machine gun fire in downtown Kiev. There is no way to fire that many weapons and not kill civilians and the longer it goes on, the more Ukrainians die and the more this will foment hatred against Russian troops, some of them conscripted kids.
Absent containing Putin, we enter a more dangerous world. Bad behavior goes unchecked. Ukraine gave up their nukes in a 1994 treaty in return for recognition of their borders. That didn’t work out so well. We could enter a period of war on multiple fronts at once—conventional weapons, dis-information and cyber but clearly the risk of a nuclear mistake is massive. Taiwan will almost certainly come into play.
This is tragic on so many levels. I witnessed the October 1993 Moscow coup and the Georgian civil war and vividly recall the physical sense that death was very near. That’s what people in Ukraine must be feeling. I’ve also been talking with Russian contacts throughout the days and while, yes, it’s a self-selecting crowd, they loathe Putin and aspire to the same things Ukrainians do—clean government, modern jobs, freedom. When I compared today to 1939 most of my Russians contacts readily agreed. Not, however, my Russian mother-in-law, who is in her 90s and devours Russian-state TV, supported Stalin and supports Putin. This even though her sister, who cared for my son when he was an infant, lives in Ukraine. This is “all the fault of the UK and US,” she told me.

Charts below (as always powered by Rose Technology and their wonderful team). Russia is the energy exporter, Europe the importer. Cut off Russia where it hurts and you create an inflationary depression in Europe.

The US borrows a lot of money from abroad (current account) and uses it to support higher consumption and higher debt. Russia doesn’t do that, which makes them less sensitive to attacks on borrowing.

The US uses this debt of boost living standard, Putin doesn’t. Ukraine has been too dysfunctional to do so and is roughly as corrupt as Russia.

In terms of the economy and financial markets, this is how I see things. Overall, this is a very easy environment to lose money, so I am taking much less risk. I’ve lost about 1% so far this year. The US stock market is down between 10% and 14%. THIS IS NOT INVESTMENT ADVICE, MORE A WINDOW INTO MY THINKING.
Inflation, which is already high, will see additional upward pressure due to the rising cost of agricultural goods, of which Ukraine is an exporter. This will put further pressure on central banks to raise interest rates.
I had thought energy prices might go up if Russia attacked Ukraine. While the sanctions seem very careful about not interrupting supplies, many pipelines run through Ukraine, so the risk is that energy prices go yet higher, particularly if the battle is protracted, also adding to the inflation risk.
Higher interest rates should hurt bonds and stocks, particularly the most expensive ones, as the price one pays per unit of earnings falls. Earnings should improve as Covid eases, which is an off-setting pressure.
As a result, this seems like a period where both stock and bond markets do poorly, which is bad for many savers.
Note to readers: this is my second update this week (the first went to subscribers). I don’t intend to publish Sunday.
1
https://www.rbth.com/history/331256-moscow-metro-wwii-history
2
Putin’s very ascension to power was tied to a diabolical act, an act so crazy that it would not have seemed plausible until it became so consistent with his later behavior—almost certainly using the secret police to bomb apartment buildings, sow fear and blame it on the Chechens. Link to documentary about the bombings.
3
Oil prices collapsed at the same time, but the statement is still true.
