Countries get off track. It happens. While there are many things that lead a country to get off track—economic crises, extreme income inequality, simmering ethnic hatred—at the end of the day countries are people and people, us, are prone to avarice, xenophobia, delusion and rage and sometimes as a species we select leaders that reflect these unproductive ways of behaving.
The list of countries that have ended up wildly off course is so long it’s almost worth asking what countries have not lost their way, if one defines losing their way as breakdowns in governance so complete that large numbers of citizens die needlessly. Writing this in a country—Croatia—that participated in a civil war a mere thirty years ago is but one more reminder, a variation of a theme.
A key difference between those countries that find their way back to healthy functioning—like Germany—and those that don’t—Russia—is whether the legal system is utilized to restore and rectify past mistakes. Germany, France, Cambodia, China, Myanmar, Turkey, Chile, Argentina, Spain, Japan, the US and others all have difficult, painful elements in their past. In that context, how former President Trump is dealt with matters. If his alleged breaches of law are dealt with in a way that, to most people, appears fair and judicious, this will bolster confidence in both the legal system and Democratic institutions. The opposite is also true and a lot scarier.The Template of a Destructive Leader
Once you discern the type, you discern the pattern. The further these leaders are in the past (Napoleon, Hitler), the clearer their behavior. The trick is recognizing the destructive leader—be they in politics or business or elsewhere—in the present day. Part of their weapon, after, all, is the ability to deceive, which makes it harder to discern the fact pattern. These are sophisticated deceivers, utilizing deceptions that are often so slight, a shading of the truth, that they can be hard to recognize.
Here, in former Yugoslavia, the poster child for this type of leader is former President Slobodan Milosevic. A fascinating, long, BBC documentary, The Death of Yugoslavia, details how his choices led to carnage and the break-up of a country. While Yugoslavia’s story has many twists and turns, a clear feature is a Milosoveic’s personality.
Given that the Yugoslavia break-up is in the past, but near past, it’s a good example both of a deviation and the application of the law to try to rectify mistakes. Psychologists sometimes describe certain personalities as being part of the “dark triangle”—a combination of traits that is some part narcissistic, Machiavellian and psychopathic. This doesn’t require that the person is a psychopath, only that they have psychopathic traits. A few of their identifying marks:
Prevarication. Milosevic’s rise to power began with a lie. On a visit to a Muslim-dominant region (that has since declared independence) within Serbia—Kosovo—Milosovic used ethnic Serb allies to manufacture a pre-meditated stone-throwing riot against police, about which he could then claim outrage. Throughout the documentary Milosevic says things that seem almost reasonable but, in fact, are lies. In 1995, he claimed things had spun so far out of control that no one could exert “rational control.” In truth, he had used all his power to spin things out of control and he too could pull it back from the brink, if he chose.
Exploitation. Milosovic’s primary goal was both raw power and to re-shape Yugoslavia from a Tito-led confederation in which ethnic nationalities were suppressed to his own vision where Serbs called the shots. But if he came out and openly used violence to achieve his goal, he realized the Europeans and the Americans would cry foul. Instead, he used proxies, specifically Serbian leaders inside neighboring Bosnia. If their actions were excessive, he could always claim plausible deniability, the very same tactic Putin used in the Donbas.
Lack of remorse - Milosovic rose to power both by first developing a patron—the former head of Serbian Party—and then later turning on him. More importantly, Milosovic was unmoved by the deaths of his victims. I am not aware of any moment in his trial at The Hague where he expressed remorse.
Obsession with prestige and status - There are haunting videos of Milosevic standing before massive crowds, barking into a microphone. Yes, all political rallies can look like this but it is also reflective of the adulation such types seek out. This is also, by the way, why such people loathe a free press and the documentary well details how Serbian state TV magnified Milosevic’s false claims.
Why was Milosevic like this? I don’t know and I’m not a psychologist. Obituaries when he died in The Hague noted that both his parents committed suicide. Whatever the motivations, the parallels with contemporary leaders and former leaders is obvious.
Putin’s rise has long been associated with a lie, in his case apartment block explosions blamed on the Chechens but with evidence over time suggesting that were in fact the work of the Russian secret police. It sounds crazy, I know. Similarly, Putin’s initial explanation of invading Ukraine was “de-Nazification,” etc. Trump, like Milosevic, had a keen sense of how to use ethnic divisions to his advantage, only in Trump’s case it was white versus Black as opposed to Serb versus Muslim. If you compare the speeches Xi gives in places like Davos with the actions actually taken, there is a notable gap. On paper, he pushed for cooperation around Covid and global warming. In reality, he refused to buy mRNA vaccines and boosted coal consumption. A more stark and consequential shift was Xi’s successful effort to adjust China’s constitution so he can serve for life, prioritizing his own legacy over strengthening rule of law.
Given how frequent the type of personality is, the question is if it’s almost a requirement to have these characteristics to make it to the top in a Yugolsavia or Russia or China or whether, particularly under the harsh light of open inquiry, we can move past such characters. After all, applying a psychological prism to behavior is relatively new. Freud’s revolutionary The Interpretation of Dreams was only published in 1899. As is typical, our knowledge runs ahead of our governing practice. You need to pass psychological tests to hold lots of different types of work, like running a nuclear power plant. Maybe voters will start to, effectively, administer them to politicians as well?
The Truth Antidote
Another question is how a country best recovers once it has experienced the sometimes cataclysmic disruption of a leader characterized by some version of the “dark triangle.”
There appears to be a big difference between both those countries that dig into the aberration and those that glance over it. A recent book, The Uncomfortable Past, by the Russian journalist Nikolai Epple, explores this very issue. Epple is interested first and foremost in Russia, but, as he notes, Russia is hardly the only case of country with an “uncomfortable past,” as I noted earlier. In Yugoslavia, for instance, not only did the Serbs slaughter Muslims in the 1990s, but the Croats also murdered civilians in that same war and during WW2 established camps where they slaughtered Serbs.
Russia’s case is important because it relates to what is going on in Ukraine today. While Khrushchev came out after Stalin’s death and gave a famous speech “On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences” there was never any formal, broad legal investigation into not only the victims of Stalinism but, importantly, the perpetrators. Practically, there was no formal legal and monetary redress for the crimes committed, despite fleeting attempts to provide the legislative foundation for such redress. In part this was because the institutions that perpetrated the crime, like the KGB, are still functioning.
The contrast with Yugoslavia, where the primary perpetrators where brought to justice, is stark. Germany and Argentina (the 1974-83 Dirty War) are also examples of a clear effort to excavate the truth and punish the perpetrators. Not addressing the crimes of Stalinism has almost certainly contributed to the rise of Putinism in many different ways ranging from the confidence of citizens to protest, limitations on state-run media, basic education to inoculate Russia against another cult of personality, etc. Epple describes how Putin both tries to acknowledge the crimes committed without looking too carefully at the institutions that committed them.
From whatever country you are reading this from, you can ask yourself if your country has confronted its “uncomfortable” past in a way that strengthened or weakened the rule of law. Whether the wheels of justice move slowly or quickly is less important than if they move at all. While Spain announced in 2018 a “truth commission” to look into crimes that occurred under Franco, to my knowledge, no official report has yet appeared. Fingers crossed the US effort to prosecute Trump is dealt with well.
A Market Outlook and Implementation Questions
Beyond the moral implications, the above matters from an investment perspective as well. With the caveat that the below is NOT investment advice and investing always involves risk of loss, the big risk is less a Fed tightening cycle than a break down in order. There are substantial number in the US Congress who, by reflexively supporting Trump, are effectively pushing a break-down in rule of law. Some of the guests on our Season #5 Podcast will address exactly this issue.
In terms of the markets, we are on a knife edge. On the one hand, the market is discounting a lot of additional tightening, another 100+ basis points, at a time when most data shows that the economy and inflation are slowing. Many commodity prices, most importantly oil, have declined. If unemployment were to rise some in coming months and wage pressures ease, this might be enough to get core inflation from the 4% to 5% range down closer to the Fed’s target. If that happens, risky assets will soar. If, on the other hand, the past tightening is only enough to get core inflation to where it is and the labor market remains tight, the Fed is going to have to tighten even more, close to 4% or 4.5%. This will crush risky assets.
So far there is no clear evidence the labor market is meaningfully softening and I am worried that the tightening might need to last for longer than is discounted. No one knows quite what it will take, including the Fed, to get core inflation lower. The peak risks were earlier this year, when little tightening was discounted and valuations were high. Still though the risks remain quite high. Timing these turns is difficult and now that the stock market has rallied 20% from its lows, even trickier because the market rise actually gives the Fed more reason to tighten.
Given these cross-currents, my conviction levels are low and my cash holdings uncomfortably high. In recent weeks, I removed my equity hedge and began slowly buying a broad based portfolio of risky assets. I’ve been using UPAR, which was created by a friend of mine, though I am not compensated by his company. I am up about 1% this year, well below where I’d like to be.
Subscriber question: Implementation Considerations
A number of subscribers asked me about how to best implement views, mechanically. My answer is that I prioritize simplicity, safety and cost. Regarding simplicity, I try to take the most direct bet I can, with as few moving parts as possible. So if I think stocks will rise, I buy an S&P Index ETF or buy an S&P future. I don’t, for instance, buy an option on the S&P because an option introduces more moving parts. Now in addition to the stock market I am betting on volatility and the precise timing of when something will occur. I use options when that is the bet I want to take, for instance selling covered calls on a stock that has already risen a lot. Regarding safety, I try to spread my counterparts and keep an eye on their health. Banks fail and brokerages go under. For my cash accounts, I use one the of large US banks. For my stock trading, I use one of the most popular namebrand brokerages. For my futures trading, the same. Finally, regarding costs, this is a direct drag on your wealth, so watch them carefully. I sometimes pay higher commissions to maintain a relationship with a counterpart with good research, but in general stock trading should be virtually free, futures trading the same and I understand I will have to pay higher commissions for higher cost trades like buying Australian inflation linked cash bonds or illiquid investments, both of which I did earlier this year.
With that, I really will go on vacation for the next 10 days or so. I value your attention, as always reach out to me at paul@paulpodolsky.com with questions. I answer my email.
Below, I was sitting at this table when I began to formulate the ideas for the above post
