This year’s posts began with The Barbell as Medicine and will end on a metaphor—we are all in a river with eddies. The goal is to get as much out of the ride down the river as we can and do our best to avoid those eddies. The river flows at a fast clip, there is a waterfall at the end. That’s true in our own lives but also for countries and investing. LIfe
When we start off down the river, it looks pretty straightforward. You go to school, play a sport, hang out with your friends. There are choices—hockey vs. basketball—but no major forks in the river, yet. Because of this, there is a strong sense of community, many people are paddling right next to you.
The first fork in the river is work. What type do you pursue? Do you prioritize service or money or art? You can’t do it all. My conversation with Congressman Jim Himes and Rabbi Friedman touch on the service path; my conversation with Eileen Murray and Ray Dalio the money fork. Harold Lopez-Nussa talks about the artistic path. Whatever the choice, the river tugs you downstream.
Within phase two, there is a fork of work with kids and without. A woman’s peak fertility is around 24 and drops steadily and relentlessly until it is zero at around age 50. The river is rushing down, you either take the fork with kids or you don’t.
After education and work and maybe kids, there is now a third phase. This third phase can either be one of growth or stagnation. If I lived 100 years ago, my life expectancy would be 58, meaning I’d be facing the waterfall’s edge in just a few years. Instead, I’m hopeful my third phase lasts. I’ve got a lot of books I want to write and people I want to befriend.
Eddies
Along the way, there are lots of eddies. The eddies are the self-reinforcing, self-defeating whirlpools we all get stuck in. Sometimes you don’t know you are in one until you are out.
Some of the eddies are from the Old Testament. Sam Bankman-Fried is now in a nasty eddy likely caused by greed and pride. If you look at what lands a person on the front page of a newspaper, often it is some form of giving into temptation.
A difficult upbringing can shunt you into an eddy. I talked about that with my wife Marina and also Roger Johnson, who served time at a young age. To Roger’s immense credit, he got out of the eddy.
The third phase of life can be an eddy, if stagnation sets in. In the third phase, there is less structure. The exigencies of kids and school are long in the past. To create meaning, widening relationships and some form of service to others seem critical. No matter what, the river flows on.
At some point, you become conscious of the waterfall, death. In Raising a Thief, I wrote about watching my mother go over the waterfall when I was six. Master, Minion opens with the main character finding out an acquaintance was murdered. I put that in there because it puts everything that follows into perspective. Nations and Regions
Countries and regions face flow and eddies. In the US, slavery was a deep, swirling eddy. The big lesson I shared in Letter from Mississippi was that once you enslave a population, shedding that legacy and turning toward education and wealth accumulation is a long, long road.
This year, Russia went into an eddy. Russia is spinning backward in time and mentality, exactly what you’d expect a whirlpool to do. In February, I visited Turkish-held northern Cyprus. That’s also an eddy, one that has swirled for 50 years.
The US, for all its flaws, has a history of getting out of its eddies. From the Civil War to Trumpism, the US gets wildly off course but eventually gets back on. The US population grew this year, solely through immigration. That people are willing to risk their lives to come to the US is significant. People flow to areas that are safe from ones that are dangerous.
Money
The river metaphor holds true for managing money, too. Asset prices are in constant motion, a flow of money from savers to borrowers. The trick is looking downriver and seeing the flow, the eddys and tricky currents. Subscribers watched me do go into an eddy when I tried to short a stock market that went sideways. In that regards, a question for you.
When it comes to forecasting the money river, there are two Wall Street tribes, which I will call catastrophists and equilibriumists. The catastrophists make money preaching catastrophe. They want you to conduct a transaction and fear is the motivator. When I worked on a bank trading floor, I watched this first hand.
The equlibriumists believe the market and financial system gets out of balance, for sure, but self-correct. Classically, a price might spurt higher, but then people buy less and the price comes back down. Sometimes, however, there are catastrophes, like Putin’s Ukraine invasion or the 1949 Revolution in China.
Where does today’s inflation sit on this scale? Catastrophists argue that we are in a new phase of secularly high inflation. Equilibriumists argue that we had a massive Covid interruption and are now going back to normal.
Inflation is coming down quickly and so far that is happening without a rise in unemployment. The chart below shows inflation shooting higher, falling and, in red, what inflation will do if it continues to fall going forward at the rate it has been. The green lines shows Fed tightening and what is discounted to happen going forward, i.e. continued tightening even as inflation falls.
Stocks and bonds got crushed this year because the green line rose. I suspect the explosion in risk premiums will reverse as we move down the red line, meaning I am an equilibriumist. I recently purchased Federally insured US municipal bonds yielding close to 7%, Japanese trading companies (that benefitted from this week’s rise in the yen) yielding 5% and I maintain my long in inflation linked bonds, an asset class that has generated questions. This is NOT investment advice; investing involves risk.
In simple terms, an IL bond pays you a real yield and whatever inflation rate exists over the life of the bond. Today the real yield is around 1.5% real and inflation is expected to be a bit over 2%. That means if inflation is 3% my return will be 4.5%. I will lose money on these bonds if a) the Fed raises rates even further (which will boost the real yield higher and price lower) or b) inflation comes in lower than 2%.
Why am I not taking more overall portfolio risk? Because it’s possible the inflation falling story runs into a problem. Rate hikes have crushed housing and tech so far unemployment is low. Can the red line occur if unemployment remains low? Unlikely, but not impossible, which is why I listen to the catastrophists, even if I don’t agree. Like you, I’m navigating the river and the eddies.
Since I started tracking my results in 2007, my average return is 8%. This year I am at zero. As you can see below, I am overweight bonds and underweight stocks, relative to my neutral asset allocation.
