We all encounter tough challenges along the way. Everyone. The question is how to struggle through them with a degree of grace and poise such that it draws people in rather than repels them and isolates you.
George Manahan was a successful public relations man, political campaign veteran and fixture of West Virginia circles when, at a dinner, his hand seized and his drink crashed to the floor. Parkinson’s. In the years since, he has turned his own challenge into a public relations effort that has pulled in Michael J. Fox, raised millions and passed key legislation to create a Parkinson’s registry. You can listen to the full conversation here.
Things I Didn’t Learn in School is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.
Said differently, George turned disease into something meaningful even if, as he describes, the day-to-day is merciless. Would that we all could muster such strength. It’s easy enough to be on our best behavior after a good sleep on vacation. The real test is summoning the strength on our worst days.
George isn’t famous and he has an important story. You will like his big life lesson at the end of our conversation. Regular listeners know everyone answers this question (what’s the biggest thing you didn’t learn in school?) differently and all the answers (40+ so far) have been good.
For those of you less familiar with Still Press, we produce books (like Master, Minion), essays and podcasts. The essays are about the ebbs and flows in money and power and how to invest. The podcast is about individual life experiences within this larger macro framework. The books are both. It all ties together.
The podcast grew out of my first book, Raising a Thief, which was about lessons I learned as a parent. After I shared my story, readers conveyed that everyone has a story like this, something impossibly difficult that either they or their immediate family is wrestling through. The learnings are often proportionate to the difficulties.
My partner on the podcast is Dave Manahan. He listened to a few of my early podcasts and said, “they sound like s—t, I can help.” And so he has. Last year he said we should talk to his uncle. That’s what led us to George. It’s hard to find a person courageous enough to talk openly about a health challenge. This isn’t the type of thing that plays well on Instagram.
In our boxing match with pain and uncertainty, health poses a particular challenge. How to be joyous and confident even when you face an illness with no cure? Ignoring reality doesn’t work, but neither does failing to have moments of awe and delight at the simplest of things—coffee at dawn, the warm sun pounding on your face, reading a well-written sentence.
George says today’s politics are nastier than when he started out. “People aren’t listening to each other” he said, which means that we don’t feel heard. But disease can be a bridge. “Parkinson’s is not Democratic or Republican,” George said. Good point.
I learned from this podcast and I think you will too. I need to bring George’s attitude to my work, and my challenges pale relative to his. My next money essay is about what is going on in China, which heavily impacts what is going on in the country you live in. I’ll share it with you when it’s done. Email me with questions if you have them, paul@paulpodolsky.com.
